Encountering Cancer The impact and consequences of cancer are immense and far‐reaching. Everyone
is vulnerable. Many of us have experienced cancer and most of us have been close
to someone encountering this challenging disease. The cumulative toll is extensive.
The data is compelling. Cancer is the leading cause of death in many states as well
as globally. The social and economic (financial) burdens are profound.
A cancer diagnosis is frightening, confusing, and generally unexpected, evoking
thoughts and feelings that are unfamiliar and unsettling. The patient has concerns
that come without warning or preparation. The patient may experience a roller
coaster of signs, symptoms, and emotions that are difficult to understand and tame.
Cancer often changes the lives of patients, families, and friends, derailing goals,
wishes, hopes, and dreams. Plans must be put on hold and decisions are required
without experience to draw on. Priorities instantly change. Survival becomes a
reality with many perplexing unanswered/unanswerable questions.
Challenges, Opportunities and Commitments
Despite the complex causes for cancer, the uncertainties associated with cancer
risk and the requirements for unique strategies to advance cancer diagnosis and
treatment, we can and should be optimistic that significant advances are being
made toward reducing the burden of cancer. Making a difference in cancer prevention, early detection, treatment, and survivorship is not an option but a requirement
and obligation. This responsibility is shared by dedicated scientists, physicians, a
broad spectrum of healthcare professionals, cancer advocates, educators, thought
leaders, and law makers who are committed to making cancer a preventable and
treatable disease. And, while there is so much to be learned and so much to be
accomplished we are making tremendous advances in understanding the biology
and treatment of cancer – knowledge that can be captured to move toward putting
cancer behind us as a life threatening disease. Numbers speak. While every life lost
to cancer is powerful motivation to accelerate progress toward bringing cancer
under control we are moving forward with confidence that more than half of the
people who encounter cancer are cured. Reinforcing progress, an increasing
­number of people are living with cancer undergoing long‐term treatments and
experiencing (compatible with) quality lives.
What Is Cancer?
Pursuit of the causes for cancer and discovery of strategies for treatment have been
elusive. Cancer defies conventional definitions for a disease with unique, sometimes ambiguous and frequently challenging biology and pathology. The complexities of changes in cells, tissues, and organs that do not respond to traditional
therapies are often unfamiliar and unpredictable. The elusiveness of cancer is an
enigma to dedicated scientists at the forefront of studying cancer in the laboratory
and to physicians who are committed to maximizing effectiveness of treatment for
cancer patients. Sustained effectiveness for the treatment of cancer and the recurrence of disease have been and continue to be difficult problems. Cancer can be
refractory to drugs, develop resistance, and acquire capabilities to circumvent therapeutic targets.
While there are many gaps in our knowledge about cancer (biology and pathology) there is emerging appreciation for the absence of a single cause. This is in
striking contrast to polio, which is caused by an identifiable infectious agent and
prevented by a specific vaccine. The lack of a shared treatment responsiveness
for all tumors can be frustrating. However, it is widely recognized that the
dominant unifying features of cancer are compromised control of cell proliferation
with decline in specialized cell functions and abrogated (relinquished) competency
for the responsiveness to environmental regulatory signals. Cancer cells generally exhibit unrestricted proliferation that may not be compensated by cell loss.
The onset as well as progression of cancer is associated with changes that include
but are not restricted to: enhanced cell mobility and motility providing capability
for metastasis, the development of secondary malignant growth at a distance from
the primary tumor; decline in the patient’s capability to enlist the immune system
to recognize and reject tumor cells; a shift from aerobic (oxidative phosphorylation)
to anaerobic (glycolysis) metabolism; recapitulated expression of fetal proteins in
tumor cells; and, competency for tumor cells to populate and multiply in vital
organs interfering with essential functions. Many of the modifications exhibited by
tumor cells provide biomarkers, biochemical indicators for the presence of cancer
and full effectiveness of cancer therapy. Others are targets for the identification
and design of pharmaceuticals to treat cancer.
Acceptance of the absence for a single cause of cancer has been long coming.
During the past century there have been an evolving series of infectious agents and
environmental factors that have been held accountable for cancer. Genetic predisposition and recently epigenetic control, non‐DNA‐encoded cellular regulatory information that is retained and distributed to progeny cells during cell division, have
been implicated as accountable for cancer. Viruses that include HPV, EBV, and HIV
have been directly linked to cancer. Inflammation is associated with the onset and
progression of tumors. And, a long list of cancer causing chemicals designated carcinogens has been identified. Compelling evidence has linked smoking, alcohol
consumption, ultraviolet exposure, and obesity with cancer risk. Rather than assigning blame to a single cause for cancer, prevailing evidence that is widely understood
and accepted supports a multifactorial basis for cancer with the realization that synergy between risk factors can exacerbate and accelerate cancer onset, progression,
and recurrence of disease. The incidence of cancer increases with age, attributable
to accumulation of acquired genome mutations, compromised capability to repair
damaged DNA/chromosomes, genes, and compromised metabolic control.
Objective, scientifically based documentation for cancer risk has been leveraged
through public awareness, effective advocacy and support from law makers into
policies, recommendations and legislative mandates to reduce exposure to factors
and practices that contribute to cancer. Regulations, guidelines, and persuasive
public opinion is implementing cancer prevention, the benefits for quality of life
are increasingly understood and accepted. The economic impact (consequences) is
recognized and appreciated. Cancer prevention is becoming understood and
accepted as a shared responsibility. With enhanced capabilities for treating cancer,
emphasis on survivorship is becoming increasingly important. have assurance my decisions are appropriate? There is so much information, most
authoritative and some questionable. There are so many options. There are numerous opinions, most highly responsible but not all consistent. And it can be difficult
to distinguish between authoritative and anecdotal reports and recommendations.
Confirmation of a Cancer Diagnosis
A cancer diagnosis may result from cancer screening; a mammogram, a colonoscopy, or a prostate cancer test. A routine physical examination or evaluation of a
suspicious symptom can be the basis for diagnosing cancer. Regardless of the competency and experience of the diagnosing physician and the capabilities of the
medical practice or health center where the diagnosis is made, the patient should
not hesitate to seek a second opinion for multiple reasons. Obtaining a second or
third opinion does not preclude treatment by the physician who provides the initial
diagnosis. Confirmation of a diagnosis provides assurance that the full spectrum of
diagnostic options are utilized or considered and that a comprehensive evaluation
of treatment plans is performed. A second opinion should not be a challenge to
confidence in the treating physician. Rather, a contributory diagnosis provides a
valuable perspective and reassurances for decision‐making by the patient and the
doctor. Criteria for tumor diagnosis and staging are evolving and options for treatment are rapidly emerging. Seeking recommendations from experts is vitally
important.
Specialized diagnostic procedures that can be informative for decision‐making
may be available at centers that specialize in treating certain tumors. With rapidly
accruing developments in treatment options, not only rare tumors but also the prevalent types of cancer, it is advantageous to secure a comprehensive assessment of
the treatment possibilities as well as an understanding of the strengths and limitations of the options. Decisions may be between medical, surgical, or radiation
therapy or a combination of these treatments. Consultation to obtain multiple perspectives is becoming increasingly important for informed decision‐making with
an understanding of the strengths and limitations of options that are available.
Treatment Options
Medical treatments include conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy that is directed to
selectively kill rapidly dividing cancer cells with doses, treatment regimens, and
combinations of drugs that are designed to maximize specificity and minimize
non‐specific, off‐target affects. Precision medicine is emerging with the objective
to target the unique defect of a specific tumor and requires molecular diagnostic
evaluation involving analysis of the tumor genome. Another emerging dimension
to medical oncology is immunotherapy where the tumor is specifically targeted or
the patient’s immune system is rendered competent to reject the tumor by providing cues that the tumor is non‐self.
Surgical options are expanding. Minimal invasive surgical procedures are being
developed that are highly effective and reduce recovery time for the patient. With
complex surgical cases a consideration is the experience of the surgeon with the
specific procedure.
Radiation treatments are advancing rapidly with more focus on treatment fields
to prevent/reduce tissue and organ complications. Specific modalities of radiation
therapy can be beneficial for certain tumors and be advantageous for contained or
disseminated (metastasized) cancers. There are advances in treatment plans that
combine medical, surgical, and radiation therapy, both sequential and combined.
To treat or not to treat is an important decision for DCIS and prostate cancer.
There is growing concern that these tumors may be excessively treated and guidelines are being developed for active surveillance, where the lesions are frequently
reevaluated. The objective is to avoid unnecessary medical, surgical, or radiation
intervention where consequences can include treatment/procedure‐related complications including the risk for secondary cancers.
Where to Obtain Treatment?
It is important to engage the most knowledgeable and experienced physicians to
establish and confirm a cancer diagnosis and contribute to development of a
­treatment plan. Academic cancer centers provide the most comprehensive opportunities for state‐of‐the‐art cancer diagnosis and treatment. Multidisciplinary team
approaches are utilized for diagnosis and decision‐making. The most advanced
capabilities, instrumentation and expertise are available for characterizing tumors
and evaluating patients. Clinical trials are available to provide the most up‐to‐date
options for tumor detection and therapy. Research at cancer centers translates
­laboratory discovery to novel options for treating cancer.
Community‐based cancer centers offer cancer patients quality care and are affiliated with academic cancer centers, working collaboratively to provide patients
with the advantage of treatment near home with access to academic cancer centers
for specialized diagnoses or therapy. Community‐based physicians who are affiliated with academic cancer centers have the ability to draw on the expertise and
experience of the centers as well as participate in clinical trials. For highly specialized medical, surgical, or radiation therapy it may be advantageous to obtain treatment where unique capabilities are available.
Patient and Family‐Centered Care
There is growing appreciation for the importance of family and friends for the well‐
being of the patient. It is recognized that involvement of family and friends
should be a priority from the initial visit. Engagement of people close to the patient
can expand availability of care givers. Unquestionably, involvement of family and
Assistance with care and emotional reinforcement are decisive factors. Understanding
the cancer patient, the disease, and treatments enables families and friends to be
maximally supportive with an accurate understanding of the challenges confronting
the patients. Beyond the treatment, involvement of family and friends continues to
be important for survivorship and should not be dismissed.
Shared Decision‐Making
The options for treatment decisions and strategies for survivorship are extensive and
complex. Turning the clock back, physicians provided treatment plans to patients
and generally there was minimal dialog beyond clarification of expectations of
patient compliance and the anticipated outcomes. Now there is emphasis on shared
decision‐making with discussions between the patient and physician on cancer
detection, treatment options, recovery, and surviving cancer as a treatable disease.
Cancer prevention is another area where there is a spectrum of choices and these can
best be evaluated by considering consequences of options by physician–patient discussion. Engaging the patient and physician in shared decision‐making provides the
patient with in‐depth understanding that will impact on patient compliance. The
dialog will allow the physician to understand the thoughts and feelings of the patient.
Pathways to Discovery
Building on Discoveries of the Aberrant Biology of Tumor Cells
Broad‐based engagement of scientists and physician/investigators has provided an
understanding of cancer biology that can translate to clinical applications. Initially,
the focus was on a cause and emphasis was on a cellular change. There is now
recognition for genetic, epigenetic, and environmental contributions to cancer risk,
initiation, and progression. There is compelling documentation for multiple cancer‐
related alterations in control of cell proliferation and chromosome structure and
function that are associated with altered metabolic control and compromised
capabilities for responsiveness to regulatory signals and execution of activities
required by specialized cells. Particularly significant is acceptance that cancer
derails essential cellular processes. Cross‐talk between parameters of control is
altered and compensatory mechanisms are invoked during the onset and progression of cancer that are mechanistically informative and clinically relevant.
There is increasing emphasis on multiple dimensions of regulation and integration of activities. There are emerging success stories where genetic, epigenetic,
metabolic, cellular, and biochemical properties of cancer cells are informative for
cancer diagnosis, decisions and options for treatment, monitoring therapeutic
responsiveness, and monitoring relapse. Monitoring the structural and functional
properties of cancer cells enhances the effectiveness of conventional chemotherapy,
Embracing the Value Added from Collaboration
The complexity of cancer research, diagnosis, and treatment requires collaborative
team approaches. Effectiveness in cancer investigation and patient care necessitates partnerships where complementary perspectives, expertise, and experience
optimize capabilities.
Collaboration accelerates mechanistic, behavioral, clinical, and translational
­cancer research. Multidisciplinary approaches reinforce creativity and innovation as
well as enhance the transition from discovery to clinical applications. Collaboration
supports development of novel laboratory‐based and behavioral strategies, data
acquisition and analysis as well as integration of complex data sets including sophisticated informatics. Research initiatives that incorporate scientists and physician/
investigators support pursuit of fundamental mechanisms within the context of
­clinical applications. Collaborative research is the longstanding approach in the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. Cancer centers, to accommodate
expectations from the National Cancer Institute emphasize and incentivize multidisciplinary, inter‐programmatic and inter‐institutional collaboration. And educational
institutions are supporting collaborative contributions for academic advancement.
Collaboration increases the effectiveness of clinical care with increasing development of disease‐site‐specific multidisciplinary clinics. To expedite diagnosis and
development of a treatment plan with comprehensive clinical input, during the
­initial visit the patient is evaluated by a medical oncologist, surgical oncologist,
and radiation oncologist and there is participation of a radiologist and pathologist.
In addition to follow‐up evaluations for immediate initiation of treatment, the patient
is generally spared the anxiety associated with a series of sequential visits.
Developmental and Age‐Dependent Considerations
There are striking age‐dependent cancer treatment considerations that are becoming increasingly evident. Pediatric oncology is an expanding field and there is
accruing understanding for drug selection, dose, and treatment regimens that are
effective and compatible with patient tolerance and responses that change with
advancing age. With pediatric patients there is growing evaluation of minimal
chemotherapy doses that achieve maximal responses to protect young children
from lifelong vulnerability to treatment‐related complications. There are similar
treatment and dose considerations for radiation treatment of pediatric and geriatric cancer patients. The changes in treatment responsiveness and dose tolerances that
occur with the transition from pediatric to adolescence are important clinical considerations. Further understanding the optimal approaches for treating adolescent
cancer patients will be important.
Emphasis on Cancer Prevention and Survivorship
The advances in cancer diagnosis and therapy have been significant. Success stories include testicular cancer, breast cancer, skin cancer, GI (gastrointestinal)
tumors, and leukemias. Equally important, there is an increasing emphasis on cancer prevention and survivorship that can advance progress toward making cancer
preventable and treatable. Progress in cancer prevention reflects the combined
effectiveness of education on the importance of healthy living, emphasizing diet
and exercise and tobacco control. Policies and legislation that mandate warnings
on tobacco products and prohibit the sale of tobacco and alcohol to minors and

Basic Concepts in Cancer
At the outset, it is important to understand that cancer is not one disease but it
includes over 100 different diseases with common features. An underlying feature
of all cancers is that they arise from a single cell that undergoes some genetic
change and becomes defiant to the normal rules of cell division. Normal cells in a
tissue respond continually to external signals that dictate when to divide, differentiate into another cell, or die. Cancer cells, on the other hand, are impervious to
such signals and exhibit autonomous growth and proliferation. This results in an
outgrowth of tissue, which may appear as a lump, at some site where there was
previously no abnormality. This outgrowth, called a tumor, may remain confined
to its original location (cancer in‐situ), in which case it is considered benign. But
some tumor cells with additional genetic alterations can invade surrounding tissues
including the bloodstream and spread to other parts of the body, where they can
settle and grow into secondary tumors that can be fatal. This process of migration
of tumor cells from its initial site to other parts of the body is called metastasis and
such tumors are considered malignant. Not all cancers appear as an outgrowth or
lump of tissue. The cancers of the blood system are characterized by a great
increase in the number of cells, such as white cells and plasma cells, circulating in
the blood. Leukemias are such cancers, in which the number of white cells or leukocytes is greatly increased.
Thus, a widely accepted definition of cancer is that it is a new growth, called
neoplasia. Of course, a new growth can also occur in adult normal tissues. For
example, muscle grows with use, the breasts grow as a result of hormonal stimulation, and wound heals when new tissue appears. Such new growth in normal t­ issues
stops when the stimulation is withdrawn, when the hormone level drops, or when
the wound heals. By contrast a tumor continues to grow even when there is no
known stimulus. Another important difference between normal and cancer cells is
in their structural and functional organization. Normal cells in an organ are highly
organized and perform specific functions. They may be assembled into channels,
ducts, or layers in an organ‐specific manner and make specialized products such as
hormones or proteins that are exported to other parts of the body to perform s­ pecific
functions. For example, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) made in the pituitary gland is released into the bloodstream and exported to adrenal glands, where
they bind to cognate receptors and make adrenal glands secret cortisol. The
amounts and the rates at which these hormones, i.e., ACTH and cortisol in this
example, are made is highly regulated. Excess cortisol production in adrenal glands
will lead to Cushing’s disease. This can happen when there is tumor growth in
either pituitary gland or adrenal gland (Figure 1). Tumor cells in general have
abnormal shapes and are scrambled in a random way and the biochemical reactions
within the cells are not as well regulated. In some cases, tumor cells may start to
make products such as hormones that the normal cells in that organ did not p­ roduce.myeloma is also a form of blood cancer that develops in bone marrow and results
from modified plasma cells that produce large quantities of abnormal antibodies;
and gliomas result from altered glial cells (nerve cells). These names are of little
value when it comes to cancer treatment. However, since cells with different
embryonic origins differentiate in different ways, the growth and biochemistry of
these various cancers are expected to be different. Therefore, cancer is not one
disease but many diseases that share the common properties of neoplasia, anaplasia, and metastasis.
The Causes of Cancers
Cancer is caused largely by agents that are external to body [3]. This is implicit in
fact that the incidence of certain cancers in individuals with similar genetic backgrounds differ significantly depending on the country in which they live. For example, in Japan the incidence of prostate cancer is three‐times lower than that in the
United States. However, when Japanese men migrate to the United States and
adapt a western lifestyle, their prostate cancer incidence rates reflect those of
Americans [4]. Furthermore, when Japanese‐Americans return to Japan their prostate cancer rates decrease to the level in Japan. Similarly, incidence of stomach
cancer is six to eight times higher in Japan than in the United States. However,
descendants of migrant Japanese settled in the United States exhibit stomach cancer incidence rates like those in the American population [5]. Thus, the diet and
lifestyle, but not genetics per se, can be major contributors to cancer
susceptibility.
The probability of developing cancer generally increases with age; a 65‐year‐
old person is eight to ten times more likely to get cancer than a 40‐year‐old [6, 7].
This age‐dependent increase suggests that cancer development is a progressive
process requiring accumulation of multiple random changes that can be either
genetic or epigenetic [6]. Genetic changes are mutations or alterations in DNA
nucleotide sequence of genes impacting the structure and function of proteins that
they encode. Mutations can be in the form of change in a single DNA base pair
(point mutation) of a gene or can involve deletion, insertion, duplication, or translocation of a large segment of chromosome containing multiple genes. Mutations
can be either hereditary or acquired. Hereditary (familial) mutations, also called
germline mutations, are those that are inherited from parents and are present in
virtually every cell in the body. Acquired (or somatic) mutations, on the other
hand, are those that occur sometime during person’s life and are present in only
certain cells.
Epigenetic changes are those that effect gene activity and expression without
causing alteration in the DNA nucleotide sequence and therefore are not mutations. Two major epigenetic changes influencing the activity and expression of
genes include chemical modification (acetylation, deacetylation, and methylation)
of histones, which are special proteins that complex with genomic DNA to form
chromatin, and methylation (hypo‐ and hyper‐methylation) of cytosine residues in
DNA. Both modifications regulate the structure and function of chromatin, affecting the expression of genes. For example, histone deacetylation or DNA methylation can condense chromatin, making it inaccessible for transcription factors
necessary for the expression of genes. In such a scenario, histone hypo‐acetylation
or DNA hyper‐methylation can silence the expression of tumor suppressor genes
whose function is to prevent abnormal growth and proliferation of cells, and
thereby promote carcinogenesis.
Humans are exposed to a variety of carcinogens daily that can cause genetic or
epigenetic changes. These carcinogens can be grouped broadly into three major
categories; (i) chemical carcinogens, such as tobacco use, alcohol use, asbestos,
and unhealthy diet, (ii) biological carcinogens, such as infections from certain
viruses and bacteria, and (iii) physical carcinogens, such as UV and ionizing radiation. Additionally, although less frequently, familial genes can also contribute to
cancer development. Besides genetic or epigenetic changes, age‐related alterations
in immune system and hormonal imbalance may also play a role in
carcinogenesis.Chemical Carcinogens
It is estimated that at least 80% of cancers are caused by chemical carcinogens. An earliest report (1775) on chemical carcinogens in humans was the finding that the
exposure of chimney sweepers to the coal tar in chimneys was highly correlated
with the development of cancer of the scrotum [8]. Since then, many coal tar products such as dibenzanthracene, and benzopyrene have been shown to cause cancer
[9]. Hydrocarbons such as benzopyrene are themselves chemically unreactive in
our bodies, but are converted by oxidation to highly reactive compounds such as
their epoxides. These reactions are catalyzed mainly by enzymes in liver cells whose natural function is to remove toxic chemicals from the blood. The activated
carcinogens travel from the liver, and can affect cells in other parts of body.
Smoking is the major cause of many types of cancers [10], including cancer of
lung, larynx, mouth, esophagus, throat, bladder, kidney, liver, colon and rectum,
and cervix, as well as acute myeloid leukemia. Smokeless tobacco (snuff or chewing tobacco) increases risks of cancer of the mouth, esophagus, and pancreas (NCI)
[11]. Tobacco smoke contains over five dozen cancer causing agents, including
benzopyrene, acetaldehyde, arsenic, and benzene, that can damage both DNA and
protein in cells lining lungs.
Alcohol consumption is also a major cause of many cancers including liver cancer [12]. Many studies have found a link between alcohol use and breast and colorectal cancers. Cancers of mouth, esophagus, larynx, and throat are more common
in alcohol users than in nonalcohol users. Alcohol may increase the risk of cancer
in multiple ways, including by metabolizing (breaking down) ethanol in alcoholic
drinks to acetaldehyde, a potent DNA damaging agent; generating reactive oxygen
species that can damage DNA, proteins, and lipids through a process called oxidation; and increasing blood levels of estrogen, a sex hormone linked to the risk of
breast cancer. The combination of alcohol use with tobacco smoking can lead to
even a higher risk for several of these cancers.
Exposure to asbestos is associated with increased risk of lung cancer and mesothelioma [12], which is a cancer of the thin membrane that lines the chest and
abdomen. Asbestos comprises of a set of six naturally occurring fibrous materials,
which when lodge deep in the lung can cause irritation leading to fibrosis (scaring)
that is inextricably linked to cancer [13, 14]. As a result, asbestos exposure eventually leads to full blown cancer in the lung. This is significant because asbestos fiber
particles are released as automobile brake linings and tires wear down. The combined effects on lung tissue of these fibers and smoking greatly increase the incidence of lung cancer.
Dietary factors account for about 30% of all cancers in Western countries [15].
A very high correlation exists between meat consumption and incidence of colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers. Meat contains animal protein, saturated fat, and
in some cases carcinogenic compounds such as heterocyclic amines and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) formed during processing and cooking of meat. In
the case of colorectal cancer, bile acids released from the gall bladder chemically
modify meat fats in intestine to make them absorbable. Unfortunately, bacteria in
intestine turn these bile acids into carcinogen‐promoting substances called secondary bile acids. The high fat content of meat and other animal products also increase
production of hormones, such as estrogen and testosterone, which increase the risk
of hormone‐related breast and prostate cancers.
The fact that many chemicals must be changed inside cells to become carcinogenic
has several interesting consequences. For example, some drugs and foods alter the
enzyme systems that activate carcinogens. The drug phenobarbital stimulates the
P450 enzyme system, which activates many carcinogens, such as benzopyrene.
Thus, production of cancer can depend on combinations of agents in the diet and
in the environment.
Biological Carcinogens
It is estimated that viral and bacterial infections contribute to 15–20% of human
cancers worldwide [16, 17]. Viruses associated with human cancers are also called
tumor‐ or onco‐ viruses [18]. There are five DNA tumor viruses, including Epstein‐
Barr virus (EBV), Hepatitis B virus (HBV), human papillomavirus (HPV), human
herpesvirus 8 (HHV8), and Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCV), and two RNA
viruses, including hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human T lymphotrophic virus type
I (HTLV‐I), whose infection is known to cause cancer. These viruses cause cancer
by introducing their genetic material into normal host cells. The genetic material is
DNA in the case of the DNA viruses, or RNA that is reverse‐transcribed into DNA
in the case of the RNA viruses. In either case, the portion of DNA involved in causing cancer is localized to a very small part of the virus genome, sufficient to code
for one or a few proteins. Generally, virus infection alone is not sufficient for cancer, additional events, such as immunosuppression, somatic mutation, genetic disposition, or exposure to carcinogens, are also needed for infection to manifest as
cancer. For example, in the case of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS),
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) does not directly cause cancer. It severely
damages the body’s cellular immunity, making the person more susceptible to
infection with tumor viruses, such as HHV8, that then cause cancer. Thus, carcinogenesis is a multistep process (see below), only one stage being caused by a virus.
In addition to viruses, bacterial infection can also cause cancer. For example,

Physical Carcinogens
Melanoma is a common ultraviolet‐induced skin cancer [25, 26]. Ultraviolet (UV)
radiation emitted by the sun is made up of two types of rays, called UVA and UVB.
Although the DNA of skin cells absorbs UVB more readily than UVA, both types
of UV rays can cause cancer. UVB absorbed by DNA is known to bond together
adjacent thymine base pairs in genetic sequence to form pyrimidine dimers.
Normally, these pyrimidine dimers are removed through DNA repair process.
Occasionally, when the repair process is defective, these cells survive but are not
the same as before irradiation and grow into cancers. UV radiation emitted by sun,
sunlamps, and tanning booths can also be carcinogenic.


Time to cancer progression (in months and years)
Figure 3. Clonal origin of cancer. Cancer arises from a single abnormal cell that undergoes successive rounds of gene alterations (mutations) and natural selection. With every round of new
mutation and selection a tumor cell progresses closer to becoming malignant and lethal. This
entire process can take anywhere from just few months to several years.

Selective expansion of surviving cells after successive rounds of mutations will
lead to tumor growth and progression (Figure 3). Cancer progression is a stepwise
process in which initiation events contribute to early stages of neoplastic transition
and then promotion events constitute frank neoplasia. It can take months and years
for a neoplastic transition to become frank neoplasia. Agents that cause initiation
are generally mutagens (initiators), such as benzopyrene in tobacco smoke, which
cause DNA damage. A cell with damaged DNA must multiply in order to become
cancerous, and this is facilitated by a promoter, which often is an irritant, such as
asbestos and rare plant products called phorbol esters. Promotors are also known
to cause DNA‐damaged cells to rearrange their chromosomes as they multiply,
thereby causing additional gene alterations. Cancer can develop even after a long
time elapse between exposures to an initiator and a promoter.
That a single genetic defect by itself is not sufficient to cause cancer is illustrated in individuals with retinoblastoma (Rb) gene mutation. As mentioned above,
familial Rb mutation can predispose a person to cancer, but additional genetic
changes are needed for a cell with Rb mutation to become cancerous. These
­additional genetic or epigenetic changes, resulting from constant exposure to
environmental carcinogens such as chemicals, viruses, hormones, disrupt the
­
­regulatory mechanisms in place to control the ability of normal cell to proliferate,
differentiate, and die.
Cells are programmed through a complex network of regulatory circuits to control their proliferation and maintain homeostasis in a tissue or organ of their origin.
These regulatory circuits comprise of proteins and enzymes whose expression and/
or activity is coupled to mitogenic signals generated by extracellular molecules,
such as GFs and cytokines, in the surrounding microenvironment of cells in the
DNA synthesis or to go into quiescence (G0 phase), is made in G1 phase.
Alternatively, post‐mitotic cells can also exit the cell cycle and differentiate to
perform a variety of their normal functions, such as the conduction of impulses by
nerve cells and the contraction of muscle cells.
Differentiated cell
Beside GF receptors, cells contain other transmembrane receptors, called integrins, capable of promoting active cell cycle [44]. Integrin receptors are heterodimer proteins that physically attach the cell cytoskeleton to extracellular matrix
(ECM). About 30% of tissue in an organ is made up of ECM, which is a noncellular material composed of a meshwork of proteins, glycoproteins, proteoglycans,
and polysaccharides that provide structural and biochemical support to the cells,
and play a major role in chemical signaling between cells. There are at least
24 different heterodimer integrin receptors (formed by the combination of 18
α‐subunits and 8 β‐subunits) with binding specificity to distinct protein moieties
on ECM [45]. ECM binding activates integrin receptors to generate signals inside
the cells that can influence their behavior in a variety of ways, including proliferation, survival, migration, and invasion. Integrin heterodimers favoring growth and
­proliferation are highly upregulated in cancer as compared to normal cells. For
example, αvβ3, α5β1, and αvβ6, which are usually are at very low levels in adult
epithelia, are highly overexpressed in some cancers. Although integrins lack the
ability to transform cells, they cooperate with GF receptors and cytokine receptors to enhance tumorigenesis. For example, α6β4 integrins cooperate with
ERBB2, a member of EGFR family, to initiate breast cancer in spontaneous
mouse models of tumorigenesis [45].
Proliferative autonomy can also come from alterations in components of downstream effector proteins that receive and process the signals from ligand‐activated
GF receptors and integrin receptors. There are two major pathways, viz., Ras/Raf/
MAPK pathway [46] and PI(3)K/Akt/mTOR pathway [47, 48], which link ligand‐
activated transmembrane signals to the nucleus (Figure 5). In Ras/Raf/MAPK
pathway, GFs, such as PDGF, EGF, and FGF, activate (phosphorylate) tyrosine
kinase on the cytoplasmic domain of cognate receptors. Phosphorylated tyrosine
In addition to Ras/Raf/MAPK pathways, activation of phasphotidylinositol‐3‐
OH kinase (PI3K) and diacylglycerol (DAG)‐dependent forms of protein kinase C
(PKC) is essential for the transition of cells from G1 to S phase, a critical step in the
cell cycle when cells commit to DNA replication, a hallmark of proliferation [49].
This is facilitated by GFs, such as IGF‐1, EGF, HER2, and VEGF, whose binding
to tyrosine kinase linked receptors stimulate membrane bound phospholipase C
(PLC), which converts phosphatidylinositol 4,5‐bisphosphate (PIP2) to phosphatidylinositol 1,4,5‐trisphosphate (PIP3) and DAG, and activates PI3K and PKC.
PI3K in turn phosphorylates and activates Akt, also known as protein kinase B
(PKB), which interacts directly with Ras/Raf/MAPK pathway to regulate the transition of cells from G1 to S Phase (Figure 5).
Hyperactivation of Akt can promote cell proliferation and survival independent
of external stimuli. Akt hyperactivation can result from somatic mutations in PI3K
gene, most notably PIK3CA (the gene coding for PI3K‐α) that increase PI3K
activity, mutation, and/or amplification of the genes (AKT1, AKT2, and AKT3)
coding for Akt, or from biallelic loss of a negative regulator of PI3K called phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) [50]. Each of these genetic alterations affecting the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway are prevalent in a diverse variety of cancers,
including glioblastoma, endometrial cancer, and prostate cancer [51]. Reduced
expression of PTEN is also found in many other tumor types, such as lung and
breast, through promotor methylation [52].
An intracellular protein kinase called mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin)
also regulates PI3K/Akt signaling. mTOR acts both as a downstream effector and
an upstream negative‐feedback inhibitor of PI3K. mTOR plays an important role
in the regulation of cell growth, survival, and proliferation by sensing and integrating intracellular and extracellular cues, including GFs, stress, energy level, oxygen, and amino acids, to control ribosomal biogenesis and protein synthesis. One
of the mTOR regulated proteins is cyclin D1, which plays a central role in expression of genes necessary for cells to transit from G1 to S phase. Deregulation of
mTOR or loss of mTOR negative‐feedback inhibition of PI3K can cause excessive
activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling leading to proliferative independence.
Aberrant activation of the mTOR pathway has been implicated in a variety of
malignancies including breast cancer, renal cell carcinoma, and lymphoma [52].
Resistance to Anti‐proliferative Signals
To avoid an unabated growth, proliferative signals in normal tissues are counterbalanced by multiple anti‐proliferative signals that induce cellular quiescence.The growth and proliferation of normal cells in a tissue are regulated through an
interaction between growth factor signaling, availability of nutrients, and cell
­density. Normal cells need a minimum amount of space to spread in order to grow.
Widely spaced cells grow and divide and eventually cover the entire space a­ vailable
to them. As cell density increases, they come into contact with one another, their
movement gets restricted, and they stop growing despite the continuing abundance
of nutrients and GFs. This process, known as density dependent or contact
­inhibition of cell growth and proliferation, is essential to the regulation of proper
tissue growth, differentiation, and development. Contact inhibition controls the
size that each organ acquires during the development. Its role in control of organ
size is also evident during regeneration of an injured tissue. For example, after
partial hepatectomy, the hepatocytes in the liver are mobilized to divide rapidly to
regenerate the liver. Once the liver reaches its original size, hepatocytes stop dividing to ensure that the regenerating liver does not over grow. Most human cancer
cells are refractory to this process of contact inhibition imposed by neighboring
cells, and continue to grow and proliferate to become tumorigenic. Significance of
contact inhibition in cancer is also evident in a strain of rat, called naked mole
(Heterocephalus glaber), which shows hypersensitivity to contact inhibition and is
highly resistant to cancer [55]. Recently, it has been found that these rats secret a
super sugar called high‐molecular‐mass Hyaluronan (HMM‐HA) that prevents
cells from overcrowding and forming tumors. When HMM‐HA is removed from
cells of naked mole rats, they lose sensitivity to contact inhibition and become
susceptible to tumors [56].
Besides the physical constraints imposed by cell‐cell adhesion, contact inhibition also involves signaling pathways that suppress proliferation. Hippo‐Yap is
one such signaling pathway that is evolutionarily conserved from fruit flies to
mammals to control organ size. Cell‐cell contact stimulates transmembrane receptors, such as E‐cadherin, CD44, and β1‐integrin, which trigger the activation of
Hippo pathway comprising of a cascade of protein phosphorylation events involving serine/threonine kinases [57]. In the basal state, YAP (Yes‐associated protein)
resides primarily within the nucleus of sparsely growing cells and acts as a transcription coactivator to stimulate the expression of growth‐promoting and anti‐
apoptotic genes including Ki67, c‐Myc, survivin, and cIAP. When cells come in
contact with one another, Hippo kinase phosphorylates (inactivates) YAP, translocating it from the nucleus to cytoplasm. This results in the downregulation of the
expression of YAP‐target genes and, thereby, the manifestation of contact inhibition. Therefore, either overexpression of YAP or dysregulation of Hippo signaling
can abrogate cell contact inhibition and promote tumorigenesis. Currently, inhibitors targeting Yap and upstream regulators of Hippo signaling are being evaluated
for the treatment of a variety of cancers, including melanoma, breast cancer, and
gastric cancer 


Extrinsic pathway

Intrinsic pathway

Death Ligand
(FAS, TRAIL, TNF)
Death Receptor

FADD
Procaspase 8

DNA damage,
hypoxia, oncogene
activation, viral
infection, lack of
survival factor

Plasma membrane

DISC

IAPs

SMAC
Bax/ Bak

Procaspase 3
Caspase 8

Bcl-2/Bcl-XL

Death Domain

33

Caspase 9
Cytochrome C

APAF1
Apoptosis

Procaspase 9

Apoptosome

Caspase 3

Figure 9. Apoptotic pathways showing proteolytic cascade of caspases. Initiator caspases 8 and 9
activated by extrinsic and intrinsic signals, respectively, converge on caspase 3 to execute apoptosis.
The arrow indicates activation and “T” indicates inhibition. (See insert for color representation.)

TNF‐α) or survival factors (e.g., IGF‐1, IGF‐2, IL‐1, and IL‐2) [70]. Binding of
death factors to cognate receptors on cell surface leads to the recruitment of several
intracellular proteins, including certain procaspases, to the cytosolic domain of the
receptors to form “death‐inducing signaling complex” (DISC) that triggers the
activation of procaspases. Typically, procaspase‐8, and in some cases procaspase‐10, are recruited to the DISC for activation. Survival factors on the other hand
keep apoptosis in check by preventing the activation of procaspases. These processes of regulation of caspases by extracellular death or survival factors constitute
so called “extrinsic” pathway for apoptosis.
Abnormal intracellular conditions, such as DNA damage, hypoxia, growth factor insufficiency, increase in calcium levels, viral infection, and oncogene activation, signal the activation of “intrinsic” pathway for apoptosis [71]. Apoptotic
signals of intrinsic pathway are mediated by cytosolic proteins such as members of
Bcl‐2 (B‐cell lymphoma 2) family that act on mitochondria to govern the release
of cytochrome‐c (cyt‐c) from the mitochondrial outer membrane into the cytosol
(Figure 9). The Bcl‐2 family of proteins can be divided into two groups with either
anti‐apoptotic (e.g., Bcl‐2, Bcl‐XL, Bcl‐W) or pro‐apoptotic (e.g., Bax, Bak, Bid,
Bim) function. Anti‐apoptotic Bcl‐2/Bcl‐XL promote cell survival by preserving
the integrity of mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and nuclear envelop.
Pro‐apoptotic Bax/Bak embedded in mitochondria outer membrane, on the other
hand, disrupt mitochondrial membrane to make it leaky and release certain factors
such as cyt‐c and SMACs (second mitochondria‐derived activator of caspases) into

34

Can cer Biology and Pathology

cytosol to activate initiator procaspase, procaspase‐9. Cyt‐c orchestrates the assembly of a multiprotein caspase‐activating complex, known as apoptosome, in cytosol. Apaf1 (apoptotic protease‐activating factor 1), a caspase‐activating protein in
the complex, then recruits procaspase‐9 to apoptosome for activation.
Activated initiator caspases in both the extrinsic (caspase‐8 or ‐10) and intrinsic
(caspase‐9) pathways converge on to the common downstream effector caspases
(e.g., caspase‐3 or caspase‐7) to execute apoptosis. However, these effector caspases, which are at the core of the apoptotic machinery, can be blocked from executing apoptosis by IAPs (inhibitors of apoptosis proteins). SMACs released from
mitochondria by pro‐apoptotic Bax/Bak can bind to IAPs and prevent IAPs from
inhibiting effector caspases. In addition, anti‐apoptotic Bcl‐2/Bcl‐XL can heterodimerize with pro‐apoptotic Bax/Bak and prevent their damaging effect on mitochondria and the release of cyt‐c and SMACs to induce apoptosis. Thus, the
apoptotic machinery is tightly controlled by anti‐apoptotic (survival) and pro‐
apoptotic (death) signaling pathways to keep the apoptotic machinery in a latent
state in almost all normal cells in human body. Any dysregulation of these signaling pathways can adversely affect apoptotic process. For example, an increase in
the expression of anti‐apoptotic proteins, Bcl‐2/Bcl‐XL, or a decrease in pro‐apoptotic proteins, Bax/Bak, would inactivate the apoptotic machinery and promote cell
survival, a key contributing factor in cancer development and progression [72]. A
tumor specific nuclear antigen of 53 kilo‐Daltons, called p53, is a tumor suppressor protein, whose main function is to sense DNA damage and activate the DNA
repair pathway in response to DNA damage. However, when the DNA damage is
irreparable, it induces the expression of genes that lead to apoptosis.
p53 induces the expression of pro‐apoptotic proteins, such as Bax, in response
to a variety of stressful conditions, including DNA damage, hypoxia, and oncogene activation, to promote cell death [73–75]. Therefore, loss of p53 function can
result in cellular resistance to apoptosis, allowing unabated growth and proliferation of cancer cells even under extreme conditions. Indeed, gene mutations effecting p53 function are seen in almost every type of human cancer at rates ranging
from 10% (e.g., in hematopoietic malignancies) to almost 100% (e.g., in high‐
grade serous carcinoma of ovary and squamous cell carcinoma) [76].
Apoptosis can also be mitigated through PI(3)K/Akt pathway [77], which is
activated by the binding of extracellular GFs, such as IGF‐1, IGF‐2, and IL‐3, to
cognate receptors. pTEN, a tumor suppressor, normally suppresses PI(3)K/Akt
signaling and, thereby, promotes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Therefore, loss of
pTEN can result in evasion of apoptosis. pTEN inactivation is a major event that
occurs in many cancers including, brain, lung, breast, and prostate cancer. In fact,
next to p53, pTEN has the highest frequency of mutations in cancers. Another
mechanism of cellular evasion of apoptosis involves expression of a soluble decoy
receptor, termed decoy receptor 3 (DcR3), which binds to the death‐inducing Fas‐
ligand and prevents it from binding to its receptor Fas and induce apoptosis [78].
Genomic amplification and/or overexpression of DcR3 is evident in various malignant tumors arising from esophagus, stomach, glioma, lung, colon, rectum, and

Can c er Develo ps in Multi ple S te ps of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes

35

breast. Thus cellular events that impede apoptosis are major contributing factors in
the development and progression of cancer.
Acquisition of Unlimited Replicative Potential
While the acquisition of the three capabilities described above can obviate basic
controls that limit the ability of cells to grow, proliferate, and survive, cancer cells
still must acquire replicative immortality, in order to proliferate indefinitely, a
characteristic of all cancers. In general, normal cells go through a finite number of
cell division cycles and then enter an irreversible non‐proliferative, but viable,
G0‐like state called replicative or cellular senescence (irreversible cell cycle arrest).
In order to be tumorigenic, cells must overcome replicative senescence. The major
determinant of replicative senescence (replicative potential) are DNA‐protein
structures at the ends of each chromosome called telomeres [79–81]. Telomeres
are critical for protecting the ends of linear chromosomes from fusing with one
another and, thereby, for maintaining the genome integrity, stability, and function
[80]. Telomeres contain several kilobase pairs of double stranded DNA made of
hexanucleotide (TTAGGG) sequence repeats. Owing to a mechanistic limitation in
the ability of enzymes of DNA synthesis (DNA polymerases) to fully replicate the
ends of linear chromosome DNA duplexes, a condition referred to as the “end‐replication problem,” the DNA polymerase responsible for duplicating chromosomal
DNA leaves 50–200 base pairs in 3′‐ends of telomeric DNA strands unreplicated.
This results in telomere shortening at the conclusion of each round of DNA replication. Some cells, such as germ cells, early embryonic cells, and some adult stem
cells that need to undergo many divisions, express an RNA‐dependent DNA polymerase, called telomerase, which adds TTAGGG repeats onto the ends of telomeric DNA strands to avoid telomere shortening [82]. However, most somatic cells
do not express telomerase. In these cells, telomeres are shortened progressively
with each cell division, and ultimately reach a critically short length when telomeres become dysfunctional. Telomere‐dysfunction normally triggers the process of
replicative senescence. Cells that fail to enter senescence invariably succumb to
p53‐mediated apoptotic death. Thus, senescence and apoptosis serve as failsafe
mechanisms to prevent proliferation of cells at risk for genome instability, which
can lead to neoplastic transformation. Nevertheless, occasionally few (1 in 10 million) cells that survive endure genome instability and acquire certain genome alterations (gene mutations). These rare surviving cells can attain limitless proliferative
potential (termed immortalization) through additional genetic or epigenetic
changes that cause the expression of the catalytic subunit of telomerase, called
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). TERT activates telomerase and, thereby,
stabilizes telomeres to sustain continued proliferation. About 90% of cancer cells
rely on telomerase for telomere stability. The rest adopt a telomerase‐independent
recombination‐based approach called “alternative lengthening of telomeres” (ALT)
to maintain telomeres [83]. Thus, telomere‐dysfunction and genome instability in

36

Can cer Biology and Pathology

the absence of normal senescence or apoptotic response and subsequent stabilization of telomeres enable cells to acquire limitless proliferative potential, which is
fundamental for tumor growth and progression.
Besides telomere shortening due to repeated cell divisions in the absence of
telomerase, telomere‐dysfunction can also result from changes in telomere‐associated proteins, such as TRF1, TRF2, and TIN2 [80, 81]. Moreover, several other
hazardous conditions, such as non‐telomeric DNA damage caused by radiation or
carcinogens, oxidative stress, and activation of certain mitogenic oncogenes, such
as mutant RAS, can also elicit senescence response despite telomere function.
Cellular senescence requires activation of cell cycle and DNA damage checkpoints
controlled by p53 and/or pRb tumor suppressors and expression of their regulators,
such as p16INK4a, p21, and ARF [81]. p53 checkpoint‐mediated senescence involves
several anti‐proliferative activities including induction of p21, a cyclin‐dependent
kinase inhibitor (CDKI). CDKs are critical for the progression of cells through G1,
S, and G2/M phases of cell cycle. CDKs phosphorylate and inactivate pRb, which
in its activated (hypophosphorylated) state binds to E2F transcription factor and
prevents it from transactivation of genes necessary for cell cycle progression.
CDKIs, therefore, can keep pRb in an activated state by inhibiting CDKs and block
E2F‐mediated expression of genes and cause cell cycle arrest. In the absence of
pRb checkpoint, an intact p53 checkpoint would activate an apoptotic pathway to
kill cells with telomere‐dysfunction and genome instability. In the event that neither checkpoint is intact, cells with telomere‐dysfunction survive and acquire gross
genome rearrangements and tumor‐promoting mutations through multiple cell
divisions. Subsequent activation of telomerase in these cells then confers unlimited
replicative potential. Thus, mutations affecting p53 and pRb enable cancer cells to
overcome senescence and apoptotic responses to telomere dysfunction and generate clinically obvious tumors.
Therefore, it is not surprising that p53 and/or pRb mutations, as described above,
are seen in almost every type of cancer [73]. However, the timing of the detection
of these mutations during tumorigenesis seems to vary from one cancer to another.
For example, p53 is generally mutated late during tumorigenesis in most organs,
including that in colon, pancreas, prostate, and bladder. By contrast, p53 mutation
is found in ductal cell carcinoma in‐situ (DISC), a premalignant breast lesion.
Similarly, p53 is lost or mutated early in astrocytoma and esophageal adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis. And in liver cancer, both p53 and pRb are thought to be eliminated at early stages of tumorigenesis. Although it is not known whether p53 or
pRb mutations are involved in the initiation of neoplastic transformation, germline
p53 mutations are associated with the occurrence of several cancers, including
carcinomas of breast, adrenal cortex, lung, and gastrointestinal tract, sarcomas of
bone and soft tissues, and lymphomas, at much earlier ages than expected in the
general population. Likewise, germline pRb mutations are associated with childhood Rb and a predisposition to osteosarcoma. Irrespective of the timing of the
detection of these mutations, there seems to be a strong correlation between loss of
pRb and lack of functional p53 in several tumors, and the loss of function of both

Can c er Develo ps in Multi ple S te ps of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes

37

p53 and pRb is required in order for cancer cells to acquire replicative immortality
and become tumorigenic.
Tumor Vascularization (Angiogenesis)
Having acquired the cellular and molecular requirements described above, tumor
cells, like normal cells, then require an adequate supply of oxygen and nutrients,
and an effective means to discharge carbon dioxide and metabolic waste, in order
to survive and proliferate for a sustained growth of tumor. Vasculature carrying
blood (blood vessels) or lymphatic fluid (lymphatic vessels) are the primary
sources for such requirements to the cells in most tissues [84, 85]. However, in
pre‐malignant stages, tumors are separated from the vascularized peri‐tumoral tissue by a basal lamina that prevents blood vessels from infiltrating tumors. In the
absence of vasculature, tumors cease to grow beyond the size of about 1–2 mm3 in
diameter, and become necrotic or apoptotic. Therefore, tumors must acquire new
vasculature (neovascularization) capable of delivering blood to intra‐tumoral
spaces in order for rapidly proliferating tumor cells to survive, and transit from a
premalignant stage to a fully malignant form capable of spreading to other parts of
body [85]. Neovascularization is achieved primarily through the process called
angiogenesis by which new blood vessels are developed from preexisting
vasculature.
Angiogenesis is a multistep process that begins when vascular endothelial cells
switch from a quiescent state to proliferate in response to angiogenic stimuli and
acquire angiogenic phenotype [86, 87]. In adults, endothelial cells (ECs) that line
mature blood vessels are mostly dormant, dividing on average once in about every
1000 days. Initiation of angiogenesis requires stimulation of endothelial cell growth
and proliferation. Hypoxic condition or an oncogene activation causes tumor cells
in rapidly growing tumors to secrete a variety of proangiogenic factors, such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF), which diffuse through the surrounding tissue and bind to cognate receptor
on ECs of preexisting blood vessels in the neighborhood. Besides inducing proliferation and migration of ECs, these factors stimulate ECs to secrete various proteases, including matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), which degrade the basement
membrane and peri‐vesicular ECM. This allows proliferating ECs to escape from
the walls of preexisting blood vessels and migrate toward the source of angiogenic
stimulus and form “primary sprouts.” Extending sprouts contain two morphologically and functionally distinct forms of ECs, called “tip cells” and “stalk cells.”
Endothelial tip cells proliferate minimally but facilitate the breakdown of ECM
surrounding preexisting blood vessels and lead the growth of new sprouts toward
tumor cells that secrete angiogenic factors. Endothelial stalk cells, on the other
hand, proliferate actively to extend sprouts and promote the formation of vascular
lumen (tube). The ECs then stabilize vasculature by secreting platelet derived
growth factor (PDGF), which recruits pericytes or smooth muscle cells to form

38

Can cer Biology and Pathology

basement membrane around newly formed vesicles [87, 88]. In the absence of the
basement membrane, the nascent vessels are unstable and are prone to regress.
Stabilized tube‐like structures (blood vessels) thus formed bring blood to tumors
and provide sustenance to actively proliferating tumor cells.
Angiogenesis is regulated not only by proangiogenic factors but also by antiangiogenic molecules [85]. Moreover, overexpression of proangiogenic factors is not
itself sufficient for angiogenesis. It should be accompanied by downregulation of
antiangiogenic molecules that inhibit vascular growth. Although VEGF is the most
prevalent proangiogenic factor that stimulates the entire cascade of events required
for angiogenesis, depending on the tumor type and tissue context, other GFs such
as bFGF, PDGF, angiogenin, TGF‐β, tumor necrosis factor‐α (TNF‐α), can also
play important roles in neoplastic vascularization. Expression of several of these
angiogenic factors is regulated by some of the same oncogenes that regulate cell
proliferation (e.g., Ras and Myc), indicating multitasking capability of oncogenes
in neoplastic transformation.
The levels of expression of angiogenic factors and their receptors reflect the
aggressiveness with which tumors grow and spread. Therefore, the levels of angiogenic factors and their receptors in tissues can serve as prognostic indicators of
cancer progression [85]. For example, there is a correlation between the expression
of VEGF family of angiogenic factors and the risk of progression of several cancers, including colon, breast, lung, head and neck, stomach, and uterine (viz; cervix, ovary). Interestingly, there is a great variation in the extent of neovascularization
between different tumor types. For example, whereas highly aggressive forms of
pancreatic ductal carcinomas remain largely avascular, other tumors including
renal and pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinomas are densely vascularized. This
variation is due to the possibility that some tumors can develop and progress by
exploiting the preexisting vasculature in the absence of angiogenesis [89].
There are several naturally occurring antiangiogenic factors, including, thrombospondin‐1 (TSP‐1), angiostatin, endostatin, interferon, and inhibitors of MMPs,
to counterbalance proangiogenic factors in normal tissues [85]. These factors can
induce apoptosis in tumor cells and ECs and block the migration and formation of
lumen in sprouting ECs. These endogenous antiangiogenic factors are often downregulated in tumor tissues. This can result from the loss of function of tumor suppressor genes that regulate the expression of these genes. For example, TSP‐1 is
positively regulated by the p53 tumor suppressor and the loss of p53 function,
which is prevalent in most cancers, would result in downregulation of TSP‐1.
Currently several synthetic inhibitors of angiogenesis, such as sunitinib, sorafenib,
and temsirolimus, are being evaluated in combination with chemotherapeutic
agents for the treatment of a variety aggressive cancers [90]. Antiangiogenic drugs
are reported to enhance the delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to the tumors by
normalizing the tumor vasculature. Unlike normal blood vessels, new vasculature
in tumors is structurally and functionally abnormal and the blood vessels are
immature and leaky [85]. These abnormalities can affect the delivery of

Can c er Develo ps in Multi ple S te ps of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes

39

c­ hemotherapeutic agents to the tumors. Since abnormalities in tumor vasculature
are suggested to result from excessive proangiogenic stimuli, it is possible that
antiangiogenic drugs may normalize tumor vasculature by neutralizing some of the
angiogenic stimuli. However, there is the concern of side effects with antiangiogenic drugs. Antiangiogenic drugs can interfere with many normal body processes
such as wound healing, blood pressure, kidney function, and increased risk of clots
in arteries leading to strokes or heart attacks. Although inhibition of angiogenesis
offers an attractive strategy for the treatment of a variety of aggressive cancers,
newer antiangiogenic drugs with a selective effect on tumor vasculature are needed
for an effective treatment of aggressive cancers. In this regard, it is important to
note that several integrin heterodimers, such as α1β1, α1β2, α5β1, α3β1, αvβ5,
αvβ8, on the surface of proangiogenic factor‐stimulated endothelial cells play an in
important role in angiogenesis by regulating cell growth, survival, and migration
[91]. Thus, ongoing efforts to develop inhibitors targeting integrins can also offer
a viable opportunity to treat cancers by suppressing tumor vasculature.
Invasion and Metastasis
The spreading of a tumor from its primary site to other sites in body – metastasis –
is the deadliest aspect of cancer. Besides invading adjacent tissues, tumor cells use
blood or lymphatic circulation to spread through the body under favorable conditions [92]. The choice for tumor cells to enter blood vs. lymphatic circulation is
dependent on the relative abundance and accessibility of the respective vessels
induced by the tumor. As described above, a network of vasculature formed as a
result of tumor angiogenesis makes cancer cells more accessible to blood vessels
than lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels inside tumors often do not function as
well as those formed outside [93]. Therefore, tumor cells must invade through
intervening connective tissue in order to enter functional lymphatic vessels. Thus,
the majority of tumor cells use the bloodstream to spread through the body. Even
those tumor cells that enter lymphatic vessels eventually gain access to the bloodstream as the lymphatic vessels ultimately drain into the venous blood when they
join thoracic duct, a large lymph duct. However, on the way to thoracic duct, tumor
cells in lymphatic vessels encounter a series of lymph nodes, which often are the
initial sites of metastasis. Tumor cells can also invade local lymph nodes directly
by penetrating through the intervening connective tissue. It is for these reasons that
the lymph nodes nearest to the primary tumor are examined for the presence of
tumor cells as an early indicator of metastasis [94].
The metastatic process involves a number of steps including migration (invasion)
of tumor cells at a primary site into the surrounding normal tissue to reach nearby
blood or lymphatic vessel, crossing (intravasate) the endothelial barrier to enter
circulation, and exit (extravasate) from a distant capillary bed to grow (colonize) at
a secondary site (Figure 10).

40

Can cer Biology and Pathology

Invasion and Metastasis
Invasion
Primary
Tumor
Stroma
Migrating
tumor cells

Blood vessel

Trans-endothelial
migration

Intravasation
Circulating
tumor cells

Intravascular
Survival and
circulation
Heart

Extravasation

Paracellular
migration

Transcellular
migration

Li
ve

Metastatic
Colonization

Kidneys

Bone

s

ng

Lu

r

Brain

Colonized
secondary
tumor

Neovascularization

Figure 10. Biological processes associated with the spreading of cancer from its primary site to
other organs in body. Source: From invasion to metastasis. (See insert for color representation.)

Can c er Develo ps in Multi ple S te ps of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes

41

Invasion
The first step in metastasis involves migration of tumor cells toward the blood or
lymphatic vessels through the process known as “invasion.” Invading solid tumor
cells, such as those in carcinomas, must first cross the basement membrane (BM)
that separates the tumor from the stroma, which is an ECM comprising of collagen
and a number of other cell types surrounding the tissue [95]. Metastasizing tumor
cells then migrate through ECM to reach blood or lymphatic vessels in order to be
carried to distant sites in body. In order to be motile, cancer cells acquire different
morphological and migratory characteristics as a result of changes in expression of
several oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, including c‐MET, EGFR, RAS,
PTEN, TGF‐β, and integrins, in response to the environmental conditions. Due to
changes in cytoskeletal proteins cancer cells can acquire amoeboid‐like morphology or mesenchymal phenotype [96, 97]. While amoeboid‐like cells tend to exhibit
increased contractility and migrate individually or in stream, cells with mesenchymal phenotype display a lower contractility and migrate collectively in clusters of
five or more cells. Cancer cells migrating in clusters, such as those from colorectal
and breast tumors, often lose their epithelial characteristics and display epithelial‐
mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers, such as downregulation of E‐cadherin
and catenin, and upregulation of N‐cadherin, vimentin, and fibronectin. E‐cadherin
is central to the formation of cell‐cell junctions that suppress proliferation and the
invasive capability of polarized epithelial cells. In contrast, N‐cadherin is a cell‐
cell adhesion protein that promotes survival and migration as observed in case of
migrating neurons and mesenchymal cells during embryogenesis. Therefore, the
switch from epithelial (E)‐ to neuronal (N)‐cadherin expression is a key event in
EMT and progression of epithelial cancers from adenomas to carcinomas.
Moreover, N‐cadherin‐mediated cell‐cell adhesions can facilitate persistent migration of carcinoma cells collectively (in clusters) through ECM [98].
There are several developmentally important genes that code for proteins, such
as Snail, Slug, Sip1, and Twist, which bind to the E‐cadherin gene promoter and
repress its expression and induce EMT [99]. During embryonic development, the
expression of these genes is under strict spatial and temporal control. However, in
invasive tumor cells one or more of these genes is often overexpressed and their
expression is associated with a loss of E‐cadherin and the gain of N‐cadherin. For
example, Twist expression is inversely correlated with E‐cadherin expression in
invasive lobular carcinomas, and overexpression of Twist, Snail, and Sip1 is associated with downregulation of E‐cadherin expression and upregulation of N‐cadherin expression in gastric cancer. These observations indicate that tumor cells
coopt genes involved in embryonic development to acquire capabilities needed for
invasion and metastatic spread. Although, tumor cells acquire EMT‐mediated mesenchymal phenotype during invasion, these cells must subsequently revert to epithelial phenotype as the cells in metastasized tumors growing at a secondary site
are morphologically and histopathologically similar to those in the primary tumors
prior to EMT [97]. This means that the mesenchymal phenotype that tumor cells

42

Can cer Biology and Pathology

acquire through EMT is transitory, occurring only during invasion and metastatic
spread. In order for invasive mesenchymal tumor cells to reacquire epithelial phenotype, they go through the reverse of EMT process, referred to as “mesenchymal‐
epithelial transition” (MET) [97]. This reversion from EMT to MET renders
metastasized tumor cells noninvasive, permitting their growth and colonization at
a secondary site. At present, the regulatory processes controlling the expression of
Twist, Snail, Slug, or Sip1 to orchestrate first EMT and then MET of tumor cells at
different steps during metastasis are not clear.
Integrin‐mediated transmembrane connections between the actin cytoskeleton
and the ECM, which are organized in discrete clusters as focal adhesions, also play
an important role in the migration of tumor cells through ECM [45, 100]. In migrating cells, the dynamic assembly and disassembly of polarized integrin‐mediated
adhesions is essential for the cell migration speed and directional persistence.
Cancer cells express different integrin αβ heterodimers on cell surfaces that recognize different ligands, such as collagen (e.g., α2β1, α1β1), fibronectin (e.g., α5β1,
αvβ3), and laminin (e.g., α2β1, α3β1) in ECM. The composition and concentration
of integrins on the surface of migrating tumor cells can change as they encounter
different stromal microenvironments. Cell migration speed is determined by the
concentration of integrins, the density of ligands, and the affinity between integrins
and ligands. For example, breast cancer cells with high level of α5β1 are three
times more invasive than those with low level of α5β1. Similarly, the level of
expression of αvβ3 in melanoma and α2β1 in rhabdomyosarcoma is correlated
with tumor invasion.
As the cancer progresses, collagen type I network in stroma surrounding the
tumor also undergo significant changes. In normal stroma, collagen fibers are typically curly. However, in early stages of tumor growth, the amount of collagen in
stroma increases and collagen fibers become straightened and line up along the
tumor BM. As the tumor turns invasive, collagen fibers get bundled and turn vertical to the BM so as to make a pathway for cancer cells to migrate away from the
tumor. Such organization of collagen fibers is associated with poor survival of
patients [101].
Intravasation
The entry of cancer cells into the blood or lymph circulation – intravasation – is a
rate‐limiting step in metastasis that determines the number of tumor cells entering
circulation and, thereby, the chances of tumor formation at a secondary site [94].
Intravasation is a naturally occurring process that is vital not only for embryonic
development but also for wound healing and for the immune system to fight infections. However, the efficiency with which cancer cells intravasate vasculature is
very inefficient as compared to that occurs during embryogenesis, wound healing,
or immune response [102]. Tumor cells can intravasate lymphatic vessels with
relative ease as the cell‐cell junctions of endothelial cells in peripheral lymphatic
walls are punctuated with a junction spacing of ~3 μm, which is large enough for

Can c er Develo ps in Multi ple S te ps of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes

43

cancer cell squeezing. By contrast, endothelial cells that line the blood vessels
have a tight cell‐cell junction and, moreover, endothelial cells are supported by the
basement membrane that is stabilized with pericytes. In order to cross these structural barriers cancer cells undergo cytoskeletal changes and also upregulate integrins and other adhesion molecules that facilitate their attachment to endothelial
cells. There seems to be a close spatial relationship between the sites through
which macrophages exit from blood vessels and the cancer cells enter the blood
vessels. Moreover, macrophages produce EGF that acts as a chemotactic agent to
guide the cancer cells toward the perivesicular macrophages. Therefore, it is possible that cancer cells with mesenchymal phenotype, acquired via EMT, may roll
along the endothelial cells to enter the blood vessels at the points where macrophages exit. Besides this active entry, cancer cells can enter passively into blood
circulation through neovasculature in tumors. Tumor vasculature is typically disorganized and leaky with looser association of vascular BM with endothelial cells
and pericytes creating focal holes large (~2.5 μM) enough for cancer cells to pass
through. Space constraints in growing tumors push proliferating tumor cells against
the blood vessels forcing their passage through such holes to enter the circulation.
Thus, the entry of cancer cells through this passive process would not require major
disruption of BM.
Intravascular Survival
As the cancer cells enter bloodstream they encounter high mechanical forces,
including shear stress resulting from blood flow, which can be damaging [102,
103]. Shear stress is so intense that most of the cells (>99.9%) die within minutes
of entry into circulation. The cytoskeleton of many cancer cells is incapable of
withstanding such shear stress and are fragmented into microparticles as they enter
blood stream and the microparticles are taken up by the myeloid cells. In order to
protect themselves from stress‐induced death they shield themselves with platelets
and coagulation factors that they activate and assemble into microaggregates of
cell‐pellets [104]. This aggregation allows cells in the center to survive mechanical
forces. In addition, single cells that acquire amoeboid‐like morphology tend to
survive shear stress as a result of their ability to attach to the substratum and
increased contractility. Some cells can also survive lethal mechanical injury by
inhibiting apoptosis through a signaling pathway activated by pannexin‐1 transmembrane channel protein‐mediated release of ATP and activation of P2Y receptor
[105]. In general, the few surviving cells within the clusters of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) are the ones that possess a higher metastatic potential than the majority of the single cells that survive circulation.
CTCs must also evade the immune system in order to survive [103]. Cells in
solid tumors are protected from the antitumor activity of the immune system by the
strong immunosuppressive microenvironment that exists within the tumors.
However, once the tumor cells are blood borne they become exposed to an unabated immune system capable of mounting an aggressive antitumor activity and

44

Can cer Biology and Pathology

destroying CTCs. Natural killer (NK) cells play a central role in tumor immunosurveillance and antitumor cell activity. NK cells contain NK group 2d (NKG2D)
receptors that recognize MHC class 1 polypeptide‐related sequences A and B
(MICA and MICB) expressed on the surface of malignant tumor cells and secrete
cytolytic granzyme B and porforin that destroy tumor cells. They can also induce
apoptosis by activating FasL‐ and TRAIL‐mediated death receptor pathways. To
overcome such immunosuppression, CTCs can adopt various methods to encounter antitumor cell activity of NK cells. They include: (i) metalloproteinase‐mediated cleavage and shedding of cell surface MICA/B to avoid recognition by
NKG2D receptors on NK cells; (ii) secretion of immunomodulatory molecules,
such as prostaglandin E2, TGF‐β, and adenosine, that inhibit the antitumor activity
of NK cells; and (iii) secretion of lactate dehydrogenase isoform 5 (LDH5) that
induces NKG2D ligands on myeloid cells, which cause downregulation of NKG2D
on NK cells.
In addition, platelet‐ and coagulation factor‐mediated formation of microaggregate cell‐pellet described above can physically shield CTCs from direct contact
with NK cells and, thereby, prevent the activation of antitumor cell activity of NK
cells. Platelets in the tumor cell microaggregates can also downregulate NKG2D
on NK cells to suppress antitumor cell activity. These are some in a growing list of
the ways through which a few CTCs are able to endure the harsh immunological
and mechanical forces that they encounter in order to survive.
Extravasation
Having survived the hostile intravascular environment, CTCs must then exit from
circulation (extravasate) into the surrounding tissue in order to be metastatic [102,
103]. Since tumor cell extravasation is a rare, inefficient, and transient event, it has
been difficult to study the mechanism and molecular regulation of tumor cell
extravasation directly. However, based on the knowledge of extravasation of white
blood cells, which is a normal and frequently occurring event, extravasation of
CTCs across blood vessel walls is believed to involve a cascade of steps including:
(i) initial capture and rolling of CTC on endothelium under flow conditions before
stable adhesion to endothelium (mediated by selectin and cadherins), (ii) arrest,
adhesion strengthening and spreading (mediated by receptors such as integrins,
CD44, and MUC1), (iii) intravascular crawling (iv) disruption of cellular endothelial cell junctions, and (v) transendothelial migration. Each of these steps in tumor
cell extravasation is currently being tested using in vitro and in vivo models. Due
to size constraints, cancer cells are reported to reduce speed and get arrested in
small capillaries leading to a stable adhesion of tumor cells to the endothelium.
This entrapment of CTCs in capillaries is considered to be the main cause for cancer cell arrest prior to extravasation. However, in the case of tumor cells that cannot
enter capillaries because of their relatively large size, adhesion between tumor
cells and endothelium in larger blood vessels is shown to be mediated by several
ligands and receptors including selectins, cadherins, and integrins. Accordingly,

Can c er Develo ps in Multi ple S te ps of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes

45

expression of E‐selectin is reported to be correlated with higher metastatic potential and poor prognosis [106]. Upon stable attachment, tumor cells are found to
perform intravascular crawling before initiating extravasation. This intravascular
crawling on endothelium is suggested to allow tumor cells to find an ideal site to
extravasate.
Mechanistically, there are two modes of transendothelial migrations; one is paracellular migration (referred to as “diapedesis”) in which tumor cells migrate
through the cell‐cell junction in the vesicular endothelium cell monolayer, and the
second is transcellular migration in which tumor cells penetrate the bodies of
endothelial cells [103]. Paracellular diapedesis is the predominant form of transmigration that CTCs use to extravasate. There are certain ligand‐receptor pairs that
have been identified to specifically affect transendothelial migration, without
affecting tumor cell adhesion to endothelium. For example, junctional adhesion
molecule c (JAM‐C)‐mediated interaction between tumor and endothelial cells
promotes lung metastasis. Using an in vitro model, it is shown that disruption of
the binding of CXCL12 ligand expressed on endothelial cell surface to the cognate
receptor CXCR4 expressed on tumor cells abrogates transendothelial migration of
lung tumor cells without affecting their adhesion to endothelium.
Although, these in vitro models have provided a molecular explanation for how
CTCs attach and extravasate through the endothelium, we are still far away from
full understanding of the mechano‐molecular mechanisms underlying tumor cell
extravasation in vivo.
Metastatic Colonization
Colonization of tumor cells at secondary sites is the most inefficient and rate‐limiting step in metastatic process. Although primary tumors release millions of tumor
cells into circulation, there is a long latent period, sometime lasting years and even
decades, before clinical manifestation of metastatic growth, and in some, there
may never be an overt metastasis. Most of the tumor cells that survive the hostile
intravascular environment and infiltrate distant organs fail to develop overt metastasis. In order for clinical manifestation of metastatic growth, infiltrated tumor
cells must find secondary organs conducive to colonize, i.e., survive and proliferate, or possess the intrinsic ability to colonize distant tissues they infiltrate. Despite
all these bottlenecks, some cells do survive and metastasize in distant organs and
turn lethal.
Some organs, such as liver and bone, seem to be inherently easier for tumor cells
to colonize than others, such as lungs and brain. This led to the concept of “seeds
and soil,” referring to the tumor cells (the “seeds”) colonizing favorably in selective distant organs (the “soil”) [107]. In this scenario, the correct “seed” must find
correct “soil” in order to colonize and grow. This concept is strengthened by the
findings that specific organ‐dependent conditions enable infiltrated tumor cells to
survive. For example, macrophages in a tissue microenvironment can induce signals by binding to VCAM‐1 expressed on the surface of infiltrated tumor cells to

46

Can cer Biology and Pathology

promote their survival. Effective colonization can also depend on the intrinsic ability of tumor cells to survive the hostile environment in the infiltrated tissues. For
example, Src activity in disseminated breast cancer cells is shown to promote their
survival and metastasize in bones. In other instances, disseminated tumor cells can
transmit signals that stimulate bone marrow progenitors to express receptor tyrosine kinase MET required for bone metastasis. Importantly, infiltrated tumor cells
express a subset of specific genes in different organs, such as brain and lung, which
can favor their metastatic growth. Thus, the availability of a favorable microenvironment within the host tissue, together with the ability of infiltrating tumor cells
to express specific genes necessary for survival and proliferation, are required for
metastatic colonization.
Besides the “seeds and soil” concept, in which CTCs extravasate prior to their
growth and colonization in surrounding tissue, CTCs lodged in the microvasculature can initiate intravascular tumor growth, forming embolus, which eventually
ruptures the blood vessel, or they can extravasate by breaching vascular wall to
form a micrometastasis. According to this concept, failure of metastasis in certain
organs is suggested to be a result of a failure of CTCs to enter those organs, rather
than those organs not being favorable for metastasis [108]. This is consistent with
an experimental observation in which the formation of tumors in certain organs is
directly correlated with the arrest of CTCs in the small capillaries of those organs
[107]. Moreover, due to differences in composition of vascular walls, transendothelial migration of CTCs can be more permissive in some organs (e.g., liver and
bone) than in other organs (e.g., lung and brain). Liver and bone marrow contain
sinusoidal capillaries made of fenestrated endothelial cells and discontinuous basal
lamina, which permit extravasation and, thereby, a high incidence of liver and bone
metastasis. Endothelium in the lung, on the other hand, has tight endothelial junctions that are not very conducive for extravasation of CTCs. Similarly, brain capillary walls are additionally reinforced by pericytes and astrocytes that constitute the
blood‐brain barrier. However certain genes, e.g., angiopoietin‐like 4 (ANGPTL4),
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), MMP1, and osteonectin, have been identified that can
mediate endothelial disjunction and vascular permeability to facilitate extravasation of CTCs in tissues like the lung and brain.
Finally, tumor cells that seed distant organs must then rely on the suitability
and fertility of the host stromal microenvironment for survival and growth. It has
been observed in experimental models that the signals emitted by primary tumors
can create “premetastatic niches” in distant organs prior to the arrival of CTCs
[109]. For example, tumor derived placental growth factor (PIGF) is shown to act
on lung parenchyma to mobilize bone marrow derived VEGFR1+ cells that
increase the survival of infiltrating cancer cells. Similarly, macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF) containing exosomes released by pancreatic cancer cells are
shown to increase liver metastasis by inducing TGF‐β secretion. Tumor cells
homing in niches can receive vital support through contact with stromal cells.
For example, claudin‐2 mediated cell‐cell interactions between breast cancer
cells and hepatocytes, mediated by c‐Met signaling, stimulate metastasis to the

Summary

47

liver. While observations such as these are valuable in understanding the ways in
which tumor cells adopt themselves to survive and proliferate in distant organs,
a lot remains to be learned regarding the symbiotic relationship between the
stroma in the host tissue microenvironment and the growing tumors. This can
differ significantly between cancer cells derived from tumors not only in different
organs but also those in the same organ. A full understanding of these prometastatic interactions in the future may provide effective strategies for the treatment
of cancers to prevent metastatic growth.

Summary
Cancer is a new growth of a tissue (neoplasia) arising from genetic changes in a
single cell. These genetic changes result in dysregulation of cellular functions
(anaplasia) leading to autonomous growth and proliferation, and manifest as a
tumor. Unlike normal cells, cancer cells do not respond to external signals that
govern cell division and differentiation. As the tumor grows, the cancer cell properties continue to change and eventually a variety of cells arise at later stages of
cancer. Although the underlying features are the same, many types of cancers are
named after the tissue or the cell of origin – carcinomas arising from ectoderm and
endoderm of epithelial cells, sarcomas from mesoderm of muscle, bone, fat, and
connective tissues, leukemia from leukocytes, myeloma from plasma cells in bone
marrow, and gliomas from glial nerve cells. A solid tissue tumor may be benign
when confined to the tissue of origin or may become malignant with more genetic
alterations causing the cells to migrate to surrounding tissues and further through
the bloodstream to other parts of the body and grow into secondary tumors.
The genetic alterations in cancer are largely caused by carcinogens in the environment and diet. These include chemicals, infectious agents, and physical carcinogens such as UV and ionizing radiation. Less frequently, inherited genes and
epigenetics can contribute to cancer development. Further, alterations in immune
system and hormonal imbalance during the aging process can play a role in
carcinogenesis.
Cancer development is clonal – originating from genetic mutations and epigenetic alterations in a single cell. It is a multistep process involving multiple mutations and alterations of several different genes. The initial genetic changes confer
a cell with the ability to proliferate autonomously without responding to the external stimuli such as GFs, cytokines, and hormones. This autonomous proliferation
predisposes the cells to acquire additional mutations that further leads to selective
survival and expansion of surviving cells in the process of tumor growth and
progression.
Cancers of all tissue types acquire the same characteristics that are unique and
complementary as they progress through premalignant to invasive metastatic
stages. These common characteristics include autonomous proliferation, resistance

48

Can cer Biology and Pathology

to anti‐proliferative signals, evasion of programmed cell death (apoptosis), unlimited potential to replicate, vascularization of tumors with new blood vessels, and
invasion followed by migration and metastasis. In each of the common characteristics, the normal cellular processes are altered following the changes in the genes
and proteins involved in each of these processes.
References
1. Siegel, R.L., Miller, K.D., and Jemal, A. (2016). Cancer statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J. Clin. 66:
7–30.
2. Pardee, A.B. and Reddy, G.P. (1986). Cancer: Fundamental Ideas. In: Carolina biological readers (ed. J.J. Head), 32. Burlington, North Carolina: Carolina Biological Supply Company.
3. Anand, P., Kunnumakkara, A.B., Sundaram, C. et al. (2008). Cancer is a preventable disease that
requires major lifestyle changes. Pharm. Res. 25: 2097–2116.
4. Karr, J.P. (1992). Prostate cancer in the United States and Japan. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 324:
17–28.
5. Kim, Y., Park, J., Nam, B.H., and Ki, M. (2015). Stomach cancer incidence rates among
Americans, Asian Americans and native Asians from 1988 to 2011. Epidemiol. Health 37:
e2015006.
6. Serrano, M. and Blasco, M.A. (2007). Cancer and ageing: convergent and divergent mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8: 715–722.
7. White, M.C., Holman, D.M., Boehm, J.E. et al. (2014). Age and cancer risk: a potentially modifiable relationship. Am. J. Prev. Med. 46: S7–S15.
8. Pott, P. (1993). The first description of an occupational cancer in 1777 (scrotal cancer, cancer of
chimney sweeps). Bull. Soc. Liban. Hist. Med. 4: 98–101.
9. Loeb, L.A. and Harris, C.C. (2008). Advances in chemical carcinogenesis: a historical review
and prospective. Cancer Res. 68: 6863–6872.
10. Carbone, D. (1992). Smoking and cancer. Am. J. Med. 93: 13S–17S.
11. Smokeless tobacco and public health: A global perspective. NIH publication No.
14‐7983. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute; 2014.
National Cancer Institute and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; pp. B5–63.
12. Ratna, A. and Mandrekar, P. (2017). Alcohol and cancer: mechanisms and therapies. Biomolecules
7: 61.
13. Cox, T.R. and Erler, J.T. (2014). Molecular pathways: connecting fibrosis and solid tumor metastasis. Clin. Cancer Res. 20: 3637–3643.
14. Wolff, H., Vehmas, T., Oksa, P. et al. (2015). Asbestos, asbestosis, and cancer, the Helsinki
criteria for diagnosis and attribution 2014: recommendations. Scand. J. Work Environ. Health
41: 5–15.
15. Key, T.J., Schatzkin, A., Willett, W.C. et al. (2004). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of cancer.
Public Health Nutr. 7: 187–200.
16. Carrillo‐Infante, C., Abbadessa, G., Bagella, L. et al. (2007). Viral infections as a cause of cancer
(review). Int. J. Oncol. 30: 1521–1528.
17. zur Hausen, H. (1991). Viruses in human cancers. Science 254: 1167–1173.
18. Liao, J.B. (2006). Viruses and human cancer. Yale J. Biol. Med. 79: 115–122.
19. Ahn, H.J. and Lee, D.S. (2015). Helicobacter pylori in gastric carcinogenesis. World J.
Gastrointest. Oncol. 7: 455–465.
20. Chaturvedi, A.K., Gaydos, C.A., Agreda, P. et al. (2010). Chlamydia pneumoniae infection and
risk for lung cancer. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 19: 1498–1505.

Referenc es

49

21. Mostafa, M.H., Sheweita, S.A., and O’Connor, P.J. (1999). Relationship between schistosomiasis
and bladder cancer. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 12: 97–111.
22. OE, H.S., Hamid, H.K., Mekki, S.O. et al. (2010). Colorectal carcinoma associated with
­schistosomiasis: a possible causal relationship. World J. Surg. Oncol. 8: 68.
23. Maeda, H. and Akaike, T. (1998). Nitric oxide and oxygen radicals in infection, inflammation,
and cancer. Biochemistry (Mosc) 63: 854–865.
24. Mustaacchi, P. (2000). Parasites. Hamilton, Ontario: B.C. Decker.
25. Reichrath, J. and Rass, K. (2014). Ultraviolet damage, DNA repair and vitamin D in nonmelanoma skin cancer and in malignant melanoma: an update. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 810: 208–233.
26. Runger, T.M. (2016). Mechanisms of melanoma promotion by ultraviolet radiation. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 136: 1751–1752.
27. Trosko, J.E. (1996). Role of low‐level ionizing radiation in multi‐step carcinogenic process.
Health Phys. 70: 812–822.
28. Garber, J.E. and Offit, K. (2005). Hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes. J. Clin. Oncol.
23: 276–292.
29. Cunniff, C., Bassetti, J.A., and Ellis, N.A. (2017). Bloom’s syndrome: clinical spectrum,
­molecular pathogenesis, and cancer predisposition. Mol. Syndromol. 8: 4–23.
30. Lebel, M. and Jr. Monnat, R.J. (2018). Werner syndrome (WRN) gene variants and their association with altered function and age‐associated diseases. Ageing Res. Rev. 41: 82–97.
31. Mehta, P.A. and Tolar, J. (1993). Fanconi anemia. In: GeneReviews((R)) (ed. M.P. Adam, H.H.
Ardinger, R.A. Pagon, et al.). Seattle, WA: Available online at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK1401.
32. Casaubon, J.T., and Regan, J.P. (2018). BRCA 1 and 2. In StatPearls (Treasure Island [FL]).
33. Lozano, G. (2016). The enigma of p53. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 81: 37–40.
34. Sherr, C.J. and McCormick, F. (2002). The RB and p53 pathways in cancer. Cancer Cell 2:
103–112.
35. Jeggo, P.A., Pearl, L.H., and Carr, A.M. (2016). DNA repair, genome stability and cancer: a
historical perspective. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16: 35–42.
36. Farber, E. (1984). The multistep nature of cancer development. Cancer Res. 44: 4217–4223.
37. Sadikovic, B., Al‐Romaih, K., Squire, J.A. et al. (2008). Cause and consequences of genetic and
epigenetic alterations in human cancer. Curr. Genomics 9: 394–408.
38. Hanahan, D. and Weinberg, R.A. (2000). The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100: 57–70.
39. Hanahan, D. and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 144:
646–674.
40. Reddy, G.P. (1994). Cell cycle: regulatory events in G1‐‐>S transition of mammalian cells. J.
Cell. Biochem. 54: 379–386.
41. Reddy, G.P., Cifuentes, E., Bai, U. et al. (2004). Onset of DNA synthesis and S phase. In: Cell
Cycle and Growth Control: Biological Regulation and Cancer (ed. G.S. Stein and A.B. Pardee),
149–200. Wiley.
42. Appert‐Collin, A., Hubert, P., Cremel, G. et al. (2015). Role of ErbB receptors in cancer cell
migration and invasion. Front. Pharmacol. 6: 283.
43. Jr. Roskoski, R. (2014). The ErbB/HER family of protein‐tyrosine kinases and cancer. Pharmacol.
Res. 79: 34–74.
44. Moreno‐Layseca, P. and Streuli, C.H. (2014). Signalling pathways linking integrins with cell
cycle progression. Matrix Biol. 34: 144–153.
45. Desgrosellier, J.S. and Cheresh, D.A. (2010). Integrins in cancer: biological implications and
therapeutic opportunities. Nat. Rev. Cancer 10: 9–22.
46. Molina, J.R. and Adjei, A.A. (2006). The Ras/Raf/MAPK pathway. J. Thorac. Oncol. 1: 7–9.
47. Laplante, M. and Sabatini, D.M. (2012). mTOR signaling in growth control and disease. Cell
149: 274–293.
48. Porta, C., Paglino, C., and Mosca, A. (2014). Targeting PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling in cancer.
Front. Oncol. 4: 64.

50

Can cer Biology and Pathology

49. Khan, A.Q., Kuttikrishnan, S., Siveen, K.S. et al. (2018). RAS‐mediated oncogenic signaling
pathways in human malignancies. Semin. Cancer Biol. 18: 30002–30006.
50. Pulido, R. (2018). PTEN inhibition in human disease therapy. Molecules 23: E285.
51. Wise, H.M., Hermida, M.A., and Leslie, N.R. (2017). Prostate cancer, PI3K, PTEN and prognosis. Clin. Sci. (Lond.) 131: 197–210.
52. Lim, H.J., Crowe, P., and Yang, J.L. (2015). Current clinical regulation of PI3K/PTEN/Akt/
mTOR signalling in treatment of human cancer. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 141:
671–689.
53. Binder, M.J., McCoombe, S., Williams, E.D. et al. (2017). The extracellular matrix in cancer
progression: role of hyalectan proteoglycans and ADAMTS enzymes. Cancer Lett. 385:
55–64.
54. Zhao, M., Mishra, L., and Deng, C.X. (2018). The role of TGF‐beta/SMAD4 signaling in cancer.
Int. J. Biol. Sci. 14: 111–123.
55. Seluanov, A., Hine, C., Azpurua, J. et al. (2009). Hypersensitivity to contact inhibition provides
a clue to cancer resistance of naked mole‐rat. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106: 19352–19357.
56. Tian, X., Azpurua, J., Hine, C. et al. (2013). High‐molecular‐mass hyaluronan mediates the cancer resistance of the naked mole rat. Nature 499: 346–349.
57. Ehmer, U. and Sage, J. (2016). Control of proliferation and cancer growth by the Hippo signaling
pathway. Mol. Cancer Res. 14: 127–140.
58. Kim, H.B. and Myung, S.J. (2018). Clinical implications of the Hippo‐YAP pathway in multiple
cancer contexts. BMB Rep. 51: 119–125.
59. Heldin, C.H., Landstrom, M., and Moustakas, A. (2009). Mechanism of TGF‐beta signaling to
growth arrest, apoptosis, and epithelial‐mesenchymal transition. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 21:
166–176.
60. Lee, C. and Cho, Y. (2002). Interactions of SV40 large T antigen and other viral proteins with
retinoblastoma tumour suppressor. Rev. Med. Virol. 12: 81–92.
61. Amati, B. and Land, H. (1994). Myc‐Max‐Mad: a transcription factor network controlling cell
cycle progression, differentiation and death. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 4: 102–108.
62. Zhou, Z.Q. and Hurlin, P.J. (2001). The interplay between Mad and Myc in proliferation and
differentiation. Trends Cell Biol. 11: S10–S14.
63. Kalkat, M., De Melo, J., Hickman, K.A. et al. (2017). MYC deregulation in primary human
cancers. Genes (Basel) 8: 2–30.
64. Chen, H., Liu, H., and Qing, G. (2018). Targeting oncogenic Myc as a strategy for cancer treatment. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 3: 5.
65. Cotter, T.G. (2009). Apoptosis and cancer: the genesis of a research field. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9:
501–507.
66. Kerr, J.F., Wyllie, A.H., and Currie, A.R. (1972). Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon with
wide‐ranging implications in tissue kinetics. Br. J. Cancer 26: 239–257.
67. Barinaga, M. (1998). Is apoptosis key in Alzheimer’s disease? Science 281: 1303–1304.
68. Julien, O. and Wells, J.A. (2017). Caspases and their substrates. Cell Death Differ. 24:
1380–1389.
69. Salvesen, G.S. and Dixit, V.M. (1997). Caspases: intracellular signaling by proteolysis. Cell 91:
443–446.
70. Walczak, H. and Krammer, P.H. (2000). The CD95 (APO‐1/Fas) and the TRAIL (APO‐2L)
apoptosis systems. Exp. Cell Res. 256: 58–66.
71. Hengartner, M.O. (2000). The biochemistry of apoptosis. Nature 407: 770–776.
72. Reed, J.C. (1999). Mechanisms of apoptosis avoidance in cancer. Curr. Opin. Oncol. 11:
68–75.
73. Hickman, E.S., Moroni, M.C., and Helin, K. (2002). The role of p53 and pRB in apoptosis and
cancer. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 12: 60–66.
74. Lowe, S.W., Cepero, E., and Evan, G. (2004). Intrinsic tumour suppression. Nature 432:
307–315.

Referenc es

51

75. Wu, X. and Deng, Y. (2002). Bax and BH3‐domain‐only proteins in p53‐mediated apoptosis.
Front. Biosci. 7: d151–d156.
76. Nichols, K.E., Malkin, D., Garber, J.E. et al. (2001). Germ‐line p53 mutations predispose to a
wide spectrum of early‐onset cancers. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 10: 83–87.
77. Stiles, B.L. (2009). PI‐3‐K and AKT: onto the mitochondria. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61:
1276–1282.
78. Wu, Q., Zheng, Y., Chen, D. et al. (2014). Aberrant expression of decoy receptor 3 in human
breast cancer: relevance to lymphangiogenesis. J. Surg. Res. 188: 459–465.
79. Kim Sh, S.H., Kaminker, P., and Campisi, J. (2002). Telomeres, aging and cancer: in search of
a happy ending. Oncogene 21: 503–511.
80. Rodier, F., Kim, S.H., Nijjar, T. et al. (2005). Cancer and aging: the importance of telomeres in
genome maintenance. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 37: 977–990.
81. Sharpless, N.E. and DePinho, R.A. (2004). Telomeres, stem cells, senescence, and cancer.
J. Clin. Invest. 113: 160–168.
82. Shay, J.W. and Wright, W.E. (2011). Role of telomeres and telomerase in cancer. Semin. Cancer
Biol. 21: 349–353.
83. De Vitis, M., Berardinelli, F., and Sgura, A. (2018). Telomere length maintenance in cancer: at
the crossroad between telomerase and alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT). Int. J. Mol.
Sci. 19: E606.
84. Folkman, J. (1971). Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N. Engl. J. Med. 285:
1182–1186.
85. Nishida, N., Yano, H., Nishida, T. et al. (2006). Angiogenesis in cancer. Vasc. Health Risk
Manag. 2: 213–219.
86. De Palma, M., Biziato, D., and Petrova, T.V. (2017). Microenvironmental regulation of tumour
angiogenesis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17: 457–474.
87. Ribatti, D. and Crivellato, E. (2012). “Sprouting angiogenesis”, a reappraisal. Dev. Biol. 372:
157–165.
88. Darland, D.C. and D’Amore, P.A. (1999). Blood vessel maturation: vascular development
comes of age. J. Clin. Invest. 103: 157–158.
89. Dome, B., Hendrix, M.J., Paku, S. et al. (2007). Alternative vascularization mechanisms in
cancer: pathology and therapeutic implications. Am. J. Pathol. 170: 1–15.
90. Rajabi, M. and Mousa, S.A. (2017). The role of angiogenesis in cancer treatment. Biomedicine
5: 34.
91. Avraamides, C.J., Garmy‐Susini, B., and Varner, J.A. (2008). Integrins in angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8: 604–617.
92. Wong, S.Y. and Hynes, R.O. (2006). Lymphatic or hematogenous dissemination: how does a
metastatic tumor cell decide? Cell Cycle 5: 812–817.
93. Padera, T.P., Kadambi, A., di Tomaso, E. et al. (2002). Lymphatic metastasis in the absence of
functional intratumor lymphatics. Science 296: 1883–1886.
94. Chiang, S.P., Cabrera, R.M., and Segall, J.E. (2016). Tumor cell intravasation. Am. J. Phys. Cell
Physiol. 311: C1–C14.
95. Sahai, E. (2005). Mechanisms of cancer cell invasion. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 15: 87–96.
96. Clark, A.G. and Vignjevic, D.M. (2015). Modes of cancer cell invasion and the role of the
microenvironment. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 36: 13–22.
97. Thiery, J.P. (2002). Epithelial‐mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer
2: 442–454.
98. Friedl, P. and Alexander, S. (2011). Cancer invasion and the microenvironment: plasticity and
reciprocity. Cell 147: 992–1009.
99. Kang, Y. and Massague, J. (2004). Epithelial‐mesenchymal transitions: twist in development
and metastasis. Cell 118: 277–279.
100. Huttenlocher, A. and Horwitz, A.R. (2011). Integrins in cell migration. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 3: a005074.

52

Can cer Biology and Pathology

101. Conklin, M.W., Eickhoff, J.C., Riching, K.M. et al. (2011). Aligned collagen is a prognostic
signature for survival in human breast carcinoma. Am. J. Pathol. 178: 1221–1232.
102. Madsen, C.D. and Sahai, E. (2010). Cancer dissemination–lessons from leukocytes. Dev. Cell
19: 13–26.
103. Strilic, B. and Offermanns, S. (2017). Intravascular survival and extravasation of tumor cells.
Cancer Cell 32: 282–293.
104. Stegner, D., Dutting, S., and Nieswandt, B. (2014). Mechanistic explanation for platelet contribution to cancer metastasis. Thromb. Res. 133 (Suppl 2): S149–S157.
105. Furlow, P.W., Zhang, S., Soong, T.D. et al. (2015). Mechanosensitive pannexin‐1 channels
mediate microvascular metastatic cell survival. Nat. Cell Biol. 17: 943–952.
106. Laubli, H. and Borsig, L. (2010). Selectins promote tumor metastasis. Semin. Cancer Biol. 20:
169–177.
107. Azevedo, A.S., Follain, G., Patthabhiraman, S. et al. (2015). Metastasis of circulating tumor
cells: favorable soil or suitable biomechanics, or both? Cell Adhes. Migr. 9: 345–356.
108. Coman, D.R., de, L.R., and Mcc, U.M. (1951). Studies on the mechanisms of metastasis; the
distribution of tumors in various organs in relation to the distribution of arterial emboli. Cancer
Res. 11: 648–651.
109. Peinado, H., Zhang, H., Matei, I.R. et al. (2017). Pre‐metastatic niches: organ‐specific homes
for metastases. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17: 302–317.

3
Causes of Cancer: Genetic,
Epigenetic, Viral,
Microenvironmental,
and Environmental
Contributions to Cancer
Michaela Reagan
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
Faculty Scientist I, Maine Medical Center Research Institute,
Scarborough, ME, USA

Introduction
It is well known that genetic mutation is the commonality linking all cancers across
stage, location, and triggering event. The origins of these genetic abnormalities,
however, are often diverse, multifactorial, and not well understood between
patients, tumor types, and during disease progression. Environmental influences,
epigenetic changes, random mutations, and systemic alterations, such as inflammation and metabolic dysfunction, most commonly initiate genetic mutations
(known as “acquired” somatic mutations), with only 10% of cancers stemming
from inherited genetic mutations (known as “germline” mutations) [1]. The multitude of cancer causes and myriad mutations associated with cancer are what make
this disease so intratumorally (within a tumor) and intertumorally (between
­different tumors) heterogeneous and difficult to treat and cure [2]. In this chapter,
the known causes of cancer are outlined and discussed to suggest preventative

Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

53

54

Causes of Cancer

Heritable Predisposition/
Somatic or Germline
(sperm or egg) Mutations

Environment/Lifestyle

A
T
C
G

Telomeres
Shortening
Random or Unknown
Environment/Lifestyle

Viruses
DNA

Chronic
Inflammation

Microenvironment

DNA wrapped
around Histones
Epigenetic Modulations:
Methylation, microRNAs, etc

Figure 1. The causes of cancer. Cancerous mutations can be caused by numerous factors.
Mutations of the DNA can result from the environment (pollutants, carcinogens, UV exposure, radiation), choices we make and our lifestyles, random or unknown mutations that are
not corrected properly, epigenetic alterations, viruses, or even from changes in the local,
noncancerous microenvironment of the cell. Mutations can also be inherited from our parents
and can be enhanced by inflammatory signals. Shortening of telomeres during aging can also
contribute to cancer. (See insert for color representation.)

measures that can be taken by individuals, societies, or governments to decrease
cancer prevalence (Figure 1).
The causes of cancer have been studied primarily in mice (often termed “in
vivo,” for “in the body”) or in culture conditions, such as glass or plastic petri
dishes, using cells removed from humans or other animals (termed “in vitro”
experiments, from the Latin, “in glass”). These experiments are advantageous in
that they give a controlled environment in which to experiment on the exact molecular cause of a mutation with correct controls with everything else held constant
except that which is being tested. This of course is not possible with human populations; however, epidemiological (human population) studies give us very strong
correlation data that provides relevant insight into real human actions or traits
that give rise to cancer. Epidemiological data can demonstrate clear correlations,
but assessing causality must be done cautiously; more on this can be found in
Chapter 10.

Tu m or Gene t ic s and Mutat ional Lan dsc ape

55

Tumor Genetics and Mutational Landscape
Drs. Robert Weinberg and Douglas Hanahan published the seminal descriptive
paper summarizing the Hallmarks of Cancer [3]. These Hallmarks of Cancer,
described in the journal Cell in 2000 [3], comprise of: self‐sufficiency in growth
signals, insensitivity to anti‐growth signals, evading apoptosis, limitless replicative
potential, sustained angiogenesis, tissue invasion, and metastasis. In 2011, based
on extensive lab research and validation, the authors added evasion of the immune
system, inflammation, genomic instability, and abnormal metabolic pathways to
the list [4, 5]. More recently, others have added differentiation arrest as a hallmark
of certain cancers that appear stuck in an undifferentiated state [6]. Although the
line between cause and consequence of many of these hallmarks is often blurred,
it is evident that targeting these tumor properties has been successful, to various
extents in different cases, and that understanding these hallmarks will help illuminate cancer biology and potential novel treatments.
Most mutations within a cell, such as deletions, substitutions, insertions, or
translocations, do not lead to cancer, but instead cause a number of other changes,
depending on their location and the type of nucleotide alteration that occurs.
Although some mutations are deleterious, many are not harmful at all and will
never be known to the mutation‐bearer. Some mutations stop the mRNA from
being transcribed, or the encoded protein from being made (if, for example, a start
codon or promoter region is altered, respectively). This could be either neutral for
the cell (due to compensation by other proteins that play a similar role in the cell)
or deleterious and cancerous (if the gene is a tumor suppressor, such as p53, discussed later). If the mutated mRNA is transcribed, the mutation may be effectively
meaningless due to redundancy of the genetic code. For example, the two codons
G‐A‐A and G‐A‐G both specify the amino acid glutamic acid and hence a mutation
causing an A to become a G has no effect on downstream function. Lastly, often
mutated proteins simply cause cell death. However, when a mutation occurs in a
coding region of the genome that is able to cause mutated proteins to emerge,
termed an oncogene, this can lead to a signaling cascade within the cell that causes
cancer. Importantly, mutations in “noncoding” regions of our genome (regions that
do not code for a gene or protein) may also cause cancer if these occur in regions
that are functional or required by the cell, such as microRNAs, long noncoding
RNAs, enhancer regions, or other regions we are only now exploring.
Cancer‐causing mutations result from DNA damage that is not correctly
repaired, errors in DNA replication, or from the insertion or deletion of segments
of DNA. For example, a chromosomal rearrangement termed the Philadelphia
Chromosome, creates a novel Bcr/Abl fusion oncogene and fusion oncoprotein
that leads to CML (chronic myeloid leukemia) [7]. This hyperactive protein causes
extensive activation of many pathways within the cell that increase the cell’s proliferation, analogous to pressing down on the accelerator when driving. Conversely,
proteins that are tumor suppressors, sometimes called anti‐oncogenes, work as

56

Causes of Cancer

breaks in the cell cycle to assure that cells do not proliferate out of control. These
can become mutated, removing the breaking mechanisms, and leading to uncontrolled cell growth and tumor initiation.
Mutations that convert cellular proto‐oncogenes (normal genes that become
oncogenes when altered by mutations) to oncogenes (genes that are known to
cause cancer), are some of the most common causes of cancer. These oncogenes
may cause hyperactivation of signaling pathways that cause cells to proliferate out
of control, while inactivation of tumor suppressors eliminates critical negative regulators of signaling, essentially removing the breaks on cell proliferation.
Importantly, some tumor types are known to be frequently caused by mutations in
specific genes (such as Ras in pancreatic cancer), most cancers are driven by more
diverse mutations with intermediate frequencies (2–20%) [8]. The most common
classes of oncogenes are shown in Table 1. By sequencing 21 different tumor types,
mutations related to proliferation, apoptosis, genome stability, chromatin regulation, immune evasion, RNA processing, and protein homeostasis have been
­discovered recently as the array of cancer causing genes [8]. Interestingly, only
22 genes were found to be significant in three or more tumor types: the well‐­
established cancer genes TP53, PIK3CA, PTEN, RB1, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF,
CDKN2A, FBXW7, ARID1A, MLL2, and STAG2, were significant in four or more
tumor types and the ten genes ATM, CASP8, CTCF, ERBB3, HLA‐A, HRAS, IDH1,
NF1, NFE2L2 and PIK3R1 were significant in three tumor types [8]. These are
sorted into categories as shown in Table 1.
Besides those genes cited in Table 1, a number of other oncogenes have been
identified as mutated in cancer that likely pay a driver role in cancer initiation.
These fall into the following categories: anti‐proliferative proteins (e.g.,
ARHGAP35, DNER, MGA, and IRF6), cell proliferation proteins (e.g., SOS1,
ELF3, SGK1 and MYOCD), pro‐apoptotic factors (e.g., ALPK2, BCLAF1,
MAP4K3, ZNF750, and TNF), proteins related to genome stability (e.g., CEP76,
RAD21,TP53BP1, TPX2, ZRANB3, and STX2), chromatin regulation (e.g.,
SETDB1, SETD2, MBD1, EZH1, EZH2, CHD8, CHD4, HIST1H4E, HIST1H1E
and HIST1H3B), immune evasion, HLA‐B, TAP1, and CD1D), RNA processing
and metabolism (e.g., PCBP1, QKI, RPL5), and protein homeostasis (TRIM23)
[8]. Other common proto‐oncogenes include genes in the following families: YAP
and TAZ [31], WNT [32], MYC [33, 34], ERK [35], and TRK [36], among many
others. Importantly, more oncogenes and oncoproteins are being discovered each
year, and novel targets and mechanisms to stop tumor growth are being developed
worldwide.
The loss of tumor suppressors can be just as dangerous and carcinogenic as the
gain of oncogenic activity, and often both of these mechanisms work in concert to
drive tumorigenesis. For example, PTEN, a tumor suppressor that inhibits activity
of the proto‐oncoproteins PI3K and Akt [37] and overexpression of prostate‐specific G‐protein‐coupled receptor have been found to act in concert to promote
prostate cancer [38]. Other tumor suppressors include APC, UBC, DAPK,
­
PLAGL1, PYCARD/ASC, RB1, pVHL, RBM5, and YPEL3. CD95 was first found

T A B L E 1. Genes significant in three or more cancer types.
Oncogenes

Normal Function

GTPases

Signal transduction, regulation of
biochemical processes

Receptor Tyrosine Kinases

Detect and transfer signals between outside
and inside of cell to switch on or off
signaling pathways

Transcription factors

Transcriptional regulation, insulator
activity, V(D)J recombination, regulators
of expression of antioxidant proteins
that protect against oxidative damage.
cell cycle regulation, cell proliferation,
differentiation, cells survival

Cytoplasmic Serine/
threonine kinases and
their regulatory subunits
Phosphatidylinositide
3‐kinases (PI‐3Ks)
Tumor Suppressors
TP53

Phosphatidylinositide
3‐kinases (PI‐3Ks)
Pocket protein family

Example

References

Ras (mutated in about 20% of human cancers). RHEB, RHOA.
HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS mutated in up to 90% of pancreatic
cancers.
Members of the epidermal growth factor receptor (HER/EGFR/
ERBB) family, platelet‐derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR),
and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR),
insulin growth factor receptor (IGFRs), ephrin type‐B receptor
(EPHB), fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFRs), ERBB3
Transcriptional repressor CTCF, myc. Nuclear factor (erythroid‐
derived 2)‐like 2 (Nrf2)

[9–11]

RAF family (BRAF); cyclin‐dependent kinases; Ataxia
telangiectasia mutated (ATM)

[16, 17]

Cell growth, proliferation, differentiation,
motility, survival and intracellular
trafficking

[12–14]

[8, 15]

[8, 18]

Normal Function

Example

Reference

Encodes p53 proteins, limit cell
proliferation, prevents cancer, binds
DNA to prevent transcription
Cell growth, proliferation, differentiation,
motility, survival and intracellular
trafficking
Signaling. RB1 prevents excessive cell
growth by inhibiting cell cycle
progression until a cell is ready to divide

Most frequently mutated gene in cancer. Encodes 12 proteins (p53
isoforms)

[8, 19, 20]

PTEN, (phosphatase and tensin homolog) dephosphorylates
phosphoinositide substrates; PIK3R1 (phosphoinositide‐3‐
kinase, regulatory subunit 1 alpha)
RB1 (retinoblastoma protein) causes retinoblastoma and other
cancers

[8, 18]

[8, 21]

(continued)

57

0004257448.INDD 57

5/10/2019 5:34:00 PM

T A B L E 1. (Continued)
Tumor Suppressors
Cyclin‐dependent kinase
Inhibitors
F‐box proteins

SWI/SNF family
Trithorax‐group proteins

Cohesin multiprotein
complex proteins
Caspases

Neurofibromin 1 (NF1)
Immune Evasion Genes
Major histo‐compatibility
complexes
Metabolism genes
Isocitrate dehydrogenases

Normal Function
Tumor suppressors
Tumor suppressor ubiquitin ligase that
drives protein degradation of
oncoproteins
nucleosome remodeling complexes,
remodel the way DNA is packaged
histone methyltransferases that plays an
important role in regulating gene
transcription
Plays a role in essential role in sister
chromatin cohesion
Activate cell death; mediated by both
receptor‐mediated apoptosis and in its
absence, necroptosis.
Negative regulation of the RAS pathway
Normal Function
Immune system recognition
Normal Function
Cytoplasmic and peroxisomal lipid
metabolism

Example

Reference

Cyclin‐dependent kinase Inhibitor 2A and 2B, (CDKN2A,
CDKN2B) codes for proteins p16 and p14arf
FBXW7 (F‐box/WD repeat‐containing protein 7),

[8, 22]

ARID1A alters the accessibility of chromatin to a variety of
nuclear factors
KMT2D (lysine [K]‐specific methyltransferase 2D), formerly
named MLL2, commonly mutated in Kabuki syndrome

[8, 24]

STAG2 (Cohesin subunit SA‐2) mutations in glioblastoma,
melanoma, Ewing sarcoma, bladder & myeloid neoplasms
CASP8 mutations can cause cancer also by causing disruption to
maintenance and homeostasis of the adult T‐cell population

[8, 26]

NF1 mutations often lead to truncation of translated proteins,
removing RAS regulation function.

[8, 28]

Example
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA‐A).
Example
IDH1, (Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 [NADP+], soluble)

[8, 23]

[8, 25]

[8, 27]

Reference
[8, 29]
Reference
[8, 30]

58

0004257448.INDD 58

5/10/2019 5:34:00 PM

Tu m or Gene t ic s and Mutat ional Lan dsc ape

59

to be a tumor suppressor but it has more recently been found that this receptor can
transmit non‐apoptotic signals, promote inflammation, and contribute to carcinogenesis [39]. Some tumor suppressors, such as ST14, have been shown to be
­regulated (or independent of regulation from) microRNAs, a topic covered in
Epigenetics later [40].
Hormones are also key drivers of many cancers, specifically those that express
hormone receptors, and mutations or other changes that cause excess hormonal
signaling to cancer cells can drive many tumors. Some examples include the thyroid hormone receptor [41] in thyroid cancer, and androgens such as testosterone
in prostate cancer, and estrogen in breast and female reproductive cancers [42, 43].
Certain mutations appear more commonly in certain types of cancers, and the
reason behind this remains unknown, making it virtually impossible to target and
treat all cancers with the same type of therapy. The mutational landscape across 12
major cancer types was recently reported. It found that mutations in certain genes,
such as TP53, are common in many different cancers (42% of cancer), while other
mutations were tumor‐type specific [44]. Inactivating mutations of tumor suppressors, such TP53 have also been shown in many mouse models to be true cancer
drivers, while other mutations have not been verified as drivers and may simply be
passenger mutations – common but not participatory in oncogenesis [20, 45].
Importantly, the development of malignant tumors generally requires an accumulation of genetic mutations through a process referred to as “multistep carcinogenesis.” Recent evidence from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) has used the latest
sequencing and analysis methods to identify somatic variants across thousands of
tumors across 12 common tumor types [44]. They identified 127 significantly
mutated genes from well‐known pathways, including mitogen‐activated protein
kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol‐3‐OH kinase (PI3K), Wnt/β‐catenin and
receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways, and cell cycle control. They also
found mutated genes in emerging pathways related to, for example, histones,
­histone modification, gene splicing, metabolism, and proteolysis. The average
number of mutations in these significantly mutated genes varied across tumor
types with most tumors having two to six mutations, a relatively small number of
driver mutations required for oncogenesis. Tissue specificity was observed in transcriptional factor or regulator mutations, whereas mutations in histone modifiers
were often pervasive across several cancer types. They also found mutation patterns that demonstrated clonal and subclonal architecture derived from temporal
tumor evolution, one of the most challenging aspects of tumorigenesis [44].
Inherited/Familial Cancers
Certain cancers are known to be “familial,” meaning a germline (inherited) mutation either provides a strong predisposition or directly causes a certain cancer.
Often cancers are a combination of an inherited predisposition and the right environmental stimuli to cause tumor development, but a strong enough genetic link,

60

Causes of Cancer

T a b l e 2. Familial cancer mutations and cancers.
Cancer Type

Genes with Inherited Mutation

Breast Cancer

BRCA1, BRCA2; TP53, STK11, PTEN,
ATM and CHEK2
BRCA1, BRCA2; Variants at 1p36 (nearest
gene, WNT4), SYNPO2, ABO, ATAD5,
RSPO1, GPX6
DDX41
PBRM1
SMARCA4
Inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK)
CDH1 (E‐cadherin) and CTNNA1 (α‐E‐
catenin), p53
APC (adenomatous polyposis coli), MUTYH
PRSS1 (protease, serine, 1 [trypsin 1])
CDKN2A
SHH‐GLI1 signaling pathway gene, SUFU
P53, RB1

[55, 56]
[57, 58]
[59]
[60]
[21, 61]

MDH2

[62]

Gynecological Cancers

Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)
Renal Cell Carcinoma
Ovarian Small Cell Carcinoma
Small Intestinal Carcinoid
Diffuse Gastric Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Melanoma
Meningioma
Various (Sarcoma, breast, brain,
retinoblastoma, adrenocortical
carcinoma)
Paraganglioma

References
[46]
[47, 48]

[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53, 54]

with affected family members and significant increases in cancer risk factors, signifies that these cancers are familial.
Many of the genes related to predispositions for certain cancers are shown in
Table 2 and also described in more detail elsewhere [57, 63]. Hereditary breast
cancer is a common outcome from a hereditary predisposition: women who inherit
pathogenic mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes have up to an 85% risk of
developing breast cancer in their lifetimes, and more similar genes have been
­identified with GWAS (genome wide association studies) [46]. GWAS and familial
cancer study results are implicating more germline mutations as causing
­predispositions for cancer every year.
Epigenetic Drivers of Cancer
As opposed to genetic alterations, which directly change the way cells express
genes due to direct mutations within the gene (or its promoter/enhancer region),
epigenetic alterations modulate the way a gene is expressed through other mechanisms. Although these two alterations have long been thought to be mechanistically distinct in carcinogenesis, it is becoming increasingly clear that these are
closely linked. Building on our increased understanding of the epigenetic regulation and signaling in physiological and pathological states, we now know that epigenetic and genetic drivers of cancer are not independent, but rather are tightly
intertwined. Epigenetic changes that are commonly associated with cancer include
DNA methylation, histone modification, nucleosome positioning, and noncoding

En v ironmental St i muli

61

RNA (e.g., microRNA) expression; all these changes alter gene transcription,
splicing, expression or translation of proteins. Recent evidence from whole exome
sequencing demonstrates that many inactivating mutations in human genes actually control epigenomic aspects of the cell, as discussed in Table 1. Epigenome
changes and mutations also have the potential to cause point mutations and disable
DNA repair functions. This crosstalk between the genome and the epigenome
offers new possibilities for therapy [64].
MicroRNAs (or miRs) are short, noncoding RNA molecules that regulate the
expression of one of many target genes. OncomiRs are microRNAs that play a role
in the onset or development of tumors and are overexpressed in certain cancers
[65]. Inhibition of these miRs using various strategies is a possibility being explored
in the field now, which may be an effective therapy for tumors that are considered
miR‐addicted, which require the over‐ or under‐expression of a certain miR to
proliferate or survive. miRs may also play a role in initial carcinogenesis of tumor
cells, but determining this requires more in vivo investigations [66]. Lastly, epigenetic alterations are also seen within noncancerous cells surrounding tumor cells,
and represent one way in which the local microenvironment may be modulated by
tumor cells to support their development (see Microenvironment later) [67, 68].
HDACs (Histone deacetylases) are proteins that modify histones to lead to
increased binding of histones to DNA, and subsequent decreased transcription.
HDAC‐inhibitors are being explored and used as anticancer therapies; they cause
increased expression of tumor‐suppressor genes, which have been shut‐off via this
epigenetic mechanism, and are a novel class of drugs that hold great potential in
stopping tumor growth by targeting epigenetic rather than genetic dysfunction. Of
course, why these HDACs may be over‐expressed or overactive may lead back to
a genetic mutation, again highlighting the interconnectedness of genetic and epigenetic changes contributing to tumor growth [69, 70]. Aberrant DNA methylation is
another key tenet of epigenetic‐driven oncogenesis, described by Tenen et al. [71].
Viral
Certain viruses are also known to cause cancers, with six distinct human viruses
currently termed oncogenic [72]. These are summarized in Table 3. Some of these
viruses are now the most preventable causes of cancer with the invention of safe
and effective anti‐HPV vaccines, which provide long‐term immunization from
these viruses [81].
Environmental Stimuli
External influences such as toxins, pollutants, carcinogens, and radiation, are one of
the ­largest contributors to cancer. Chronic inflammation is arguably the largest risk
factor for cancer, with 20% of cancers being linked to chronic infection and 30%

62

Causes of Cancer

T a b l e 3. Viral‐associated cancers.
Virus
Human papillomaviruses (HPVs)

Hepatitis B Virus (HBV)
Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
Epstein‐Barr virus (EBV)
Kaposi sarcoma virus (KSHV), a
herpes virus
human T‐cell leukemia/lymphoma
virus type 1 (HTLV‐1)
Merkel cell polyomavirus
HIV

Resulting Cancer
~100% of cervix/uterine tumors, significant proportion of
anal, penile, and oral carcinomas [72], some head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) [73–75].
Hepatocellular (liver) cancer [76],
Hepatocellular (liver) cancer [77]
Burkitt lymphoma, some Hodgkin lymphomas,
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and some gastric cancers
Kaposi sarcoma [78]
Adult T leukemia/lymphoma [79]
Merkel cell carcinoma [80]
Not directly oncogenic, but can be associated with cancer
through immunosuppression (AIDS) [72]

of cancers being linked to chronic inhalation of pollutants such as tobacco smoke
and silica [82]. Up to 35% of cancers can be attributed to dietary factors, including
20% of cancers being linked with obesity [82]. The link between inflammation and
cancer has become stronger as more epidemiological and in vivo evidence has
accumulated [82]. Gut and skin microbiomes, influenced by diet, genetics, initial
colonization of microbes, antibiotics, and other variables, are also gathering potential as new mediators of many diseases, including cancer [83, 84]. Some of the
most well‐known and strongly supported environmental causes of cancers, with
both epidemiological and in vivo/in vitro data are shown in Table 4. A more in
depth review of this area can also be found in Sankpal et al. [120].
Other epidemiological data correlates risk with certain variables, but the direct
causative links may be less biologically understood or more complicated. For
example, exercise decreases the risks of many cancers, likely through whole‐systemic effects such as decreased inflammation, decreased risk of obesity, decreased
metabolic syndrome, and better overall immune function, but the pathways governing these changes are highly interconnected. Similarly, deceased “sitting time”
is significantly associated with decreased cancer risk [130], but “sitting time” is a
complex variable containing multiple other variables and no direct studies have
proven that “increased sitting time” itself directly causes cancer (unlike, say, cigarette smoke). Other data tell us increased risks for cancer without a known or
hypothesized mechanism; for example, African Americans (vs Caucasians) and
males (vs females) have an increased risk of multiple myeloma (MM) but no theories or biological scientific studies can yet explain this. This may suggest that there
are underlying mechanisms by which MM progresses that we do not fully understand, or, conversely, that there are simply correlations that may not suggest causation. These are important to differentiate when determining best treatments,
prevention, and risk stratification categories.

63

Mi c roenv ironm en t‐Driv en Oncogenesis

T a b l e 4. Common environmental causes of cancer.
Agent
Cigarette Smoke
Asbestos
Pesticides (e.g.,
Dichlorodiphenyl‐
trichloroethane
[DDT], etc.)
“Western Diet” (High
Fat/carb/red meat,
Low Fiber, Low
vegetable)
Alcohol (Chronic/high
doses)

Ionizing Radiation
(UV sunlight/
tanning beds)
Obesity (often
interdependent with
Metabolic
Syndrome/Diabetes)

Cancer
Lung, Esophageal,
Larynx, Oral
Mesothelioma, Stomach,
Lung, others
All. Notably blood, skin
cancer, colorectal and
breast cancer
Colorectal, Liver.
Associations with
other cancers
Liver, mouth, pharynx,
larynx, esophagus,
colon, rectum, Upper
aerodigestive tract
Nonmelanoma and
melanoma skin
cancers
Liver, endometrial,
pancreatic, colon,
potentially others.

Low Physical Activity

Breast cancer, colon
cancer, skin cancer

Pollution, certain
Chemicals, and
Carcinogens

Lung cancer (Air); Liver,
lung, bladder, and
kidney cancer (Water)

Notes

References
[85–88]
[89–93]

Most up‐to‐date and
comprehensive review
can be found in Guyton
et al. [94].
Restricted calorie diet can
also reduce cancer
prevalence [103, 104].

[95–102]

No increased risk of breast
cancer [110], leukemia
[111] or multiple
myeloma [112]
Optimal dosages should
maximize Vitamin D and
minimize cancer risks.
Confounded with
microbiome [119],
adipokines,
inflammation,
metabolism changes.
Many confounding effects,
depending on type of
activity, type of
organ, etc.
Arsenic, by‐products of
chlorination, and other
pollutants in water.

[113–115]

[84, 105–109]

[116–118]

[120–124]

[125–127]

[128, 129]

Microenvironment‐Driven Oncogenesis
Interestingly, it has recently surfaced that microenvironmental stimuli, meaning
changes in the local microenvironment surrounding a cell within a certain niche or
organ within the body, can also directly cause cancerous mutations and tumor
development in neighboring cells [131]. For example, new mouse models have
described ways in which modulations of the local bone microenvironment (deletion of the gene Dicer1 specifically in mouse osteoprogenitors), can give rise to
mutations in adjacent cells; tumor of local blood cells, specifically leukemia, were
instigated through interaction with this modulated, dysfunctional local environment [132]. Many of the mechanisms behind this process remain to be elucidated,
but may be related to changes in metabolism in susceptible cells and increases in

64

Causes of Cancer

oxidative stress leading to DNA damage [133]. This data defy the dogma of cell‐
autonomous events that lead to initiation of cancer, suggesting that leukemias may
develop through non‐cell autonomous pathways, which may be true for other
hematological malignancies such as myeloma, or solid tumors as well. Hence,
aberrant microenvironments can cause cancer by creating a niche, or tumor‐enabling milieu, with an ability to prime or directly initiate tumorigenesis. The possibility that disruption of the normal cells surrounding the tumor may be not just a
consequence, but potentially an initiator of cancer, deserves further interrogation.
Moreover, mechanisms by which the abnormal local environment signals and
causes neighboring cells to become cancer cells must also be explored more fully,
as this may involve cell fusion or cell–cell communication via exosome, microvesicles, microparticles, excreted proteins, RNA, or even DNA. Research into
microenvironment‐directed carcinogenesis may have profound implications for
anticancer therapies of the future.

Tumor Heterogeneity and Clonality
Tumors are often spatially and temporally heterogeneous within a patient, causing a huge challenge for doctors and researchers in finding the “cause” of a
certain cancer. Tumors are also often heterogeneous across patients and develop,
spread, and respond to treatments differently. Moreover, anticancer treatments
that do not kill 100% of tumor cells (which is most treatments), often allow a
certain resistant clone to grow from the rainbow of pretreatment clones or
evolve in response to the treatment, leading to the development of a whole new
type of drug‐resistant tumor with new challenges and traits. It is also common
(found in 2–6% of all cancers) that the first, or primary, tumor cannot be identified or located if the tumor has spread (metastasized) or remutated (picked up a
myriad of other genetic mutations). This type of tumor, known as “carcinoma of
unknown primary origin” (CUP) [134], is detected when it has already begun to
spread or disseminate throughout the body, undergoing EMT (Epithelial to
Mesenchymal Transition, essential for carcinoma metastasis) that leads to a
change in cell marker expression and makes it harder to detect the primary location or type of cell that became mutated. Moreover, even when healthcare providers can diagnose a type of cancer, it can often be difficult to identify the
cause because there may be so many different types of mutations within the
cancer – each cell may represent a different clone – and mathematical models to
describe which clone likely stemmed from which clone can be incredibly challenging in humans, as well as mice. For example, multiple myeloma (MM), a
type of blood cancer that grows and spreads in the bone marrow (BM), is composed of many different clones of MM cells, and certain clones emerge after
different rounds of chemotherapy and treatment, making the identification of
the driver clone or mutation challenging [135].

65

Causes of Disease P ro g ression

Causes of Disease Progression
When searching for the cause of cancer, it is important to recognize that an initial
mutation causing an abnormal growth is not necessarily a cancer (it may be simply a
benign growth or precancerous carcinoma in situ). In this way, the causes of cancer
go beyond the initial mutations; cancer can be stopped if invasion is prohibited, even
if all mutation‐containing cells are not eradicated. For these mutated cells to develop
beyond an isolated, mutated cell and become overt, symptom‐causing cancer, the
cells must adapt, mutate, or otherwise change their local environment (Figure 2). Most
cancers, though not all (e.g., brain tumors) must invade the surrounding tissue and
metastasize to wreak havoc. To do this, solid tumors undergo an EMT (epithelial-tomesenchymal transition) that allows them to migrate to distant locations. Breast cancers must invade and migrate before to make the transition from benign (precancerous
carcinoma in situ) to invasive carcinoma stages. In this way, there are actually many
Evasion of Immune system
Inflammation

T effectors and
NK cells

Therapy Resistance

Tissue Invasion/
Extravasation
Metastasis

Metabolic Changes to
Accommodate Available
Energy Supply and Rapid
Proliferation

Mutations

Increased
Phosphorylation
and Protein
Signaling

Epigenetic Changes

Cell Cycle Acceleration &
Loss of Tumor Suppressors

Adaptations to
Microenvironments
(hypoxia, new niches,
anoikis resistance,
hormones)

Hijacking and
Remodeling of the
Niche; Forward
Feedback

RANKL

Recruitment of Blood
Supply-Angiogenesis

Figure 2. Drivers of cancer. Genetic and epigenetic mutations or alterations typically lead to altered
signaling within a cell that alter cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, apoptosis, or cell death, such
that the cell becomes immortal. Inflammation, metabolic changes, immune evasion, and signals
from the local microenvironment can also contribute to tumorigenesis and disease progression.
These mutations then lead to therapy resistance, increased survival ability, blood vessel recruitment
­(angiogenesis), invasion and metastasis, and modulation of the local noncancerous environment to
further support the tumor through positive feedback loops. RANKL, Receptor activator of nuclear
factor kappa-Β ligand. (See insert for color representation.)

66

Causes of Cancer

other causes of cancer, including all the steps that support this invasive and migratory capacity of tumor cells. Depending on the tumor, this may include many stages
of metastasis including local migration through the basement extracellular matrix
membrane, angiogenesis (recruitment of blood vessels to the tumor), evasion of
the immune system, transendothelial migration into (intravasation) and out of
(extravasation) the blood vessels, survival while traveling through the circulatory
or lymphatic systems, homing to distant organs, reinitiation of proliferation at the
distant site, metabolic changes and adaptations to the new microenvironment, and
hijacking of the new environment to support tumor growth and drug/therapy
resistance.

Microenvironment Hijacking for Cancer Progression
As mentioned above, the microenvironment often acts as a tumor‐supportive niche
essential for tumor cell growth. Many tumor cells are completely reliant on the
correct local microenvironment: metastatic breast cancer cells commonly grow in
the BM niche but do not grow in other organs, such as the pancreas [136].
Organotropism, or the specific homing of cancer cells for certain types of distant
organs, often differs across tumor‐types [137, 138]. This has been seen in humans
and in mouse models and demonstrates that, although not always crucial in the
cause of cancer, the microenvironment may be key in determining if the tumor is
able to disseminate and colonize other organs within the patient [139–141]. As
tumor cells often hijack and modulate the microenvironment that they spread or
metastasize into, understanding the bi‐directional communication between the
microenvironment or host cells (such as immune cells [142, 143], BM stromal
cells [67, 144], osteoblasts [145], cancer‐associated fibroblasts [146], or tumor‐
associated macrophages [147]) and the resident tumor cell may be of even greater
importance in designing ways to stop tumor growth after the initial mutation has
occurred.
For example, the unique properties of the BM niche make it exceptionally conducive for tumor cell colonization. Breast cancer (BrCa), prostate cancer (PrCa),
and MM cells strongly prefer to metastasize and grow within BM, compared to
other anatomical locations, due not only to characteristic properties of the bone
described above, but also due to positive feedback loops initiated by tumor cells
within the niche. By causing osteolytic (bone‐destructive, common in BrCa and MM)
or osteoblastic (bone forming, common in PrCa) lesions in bone, cellular crosstalk is
initiated that supports tumor growth and uncoupling of bone remodeling. Osteolytic
cancers induce a forward feedback loop termed the “vicious cycle,” where bone‐
embedded growth factors, ECM (extracellular matrix) proteins, and calcium are
released as bone is resorbed, which then signal to tumor cells to support their growth
[148, 149]. As tumor cells (seeds) take hold and begin to grow in the fertile soil of
the BM, dynamic interactions occur where the seeds modulate and usurp the BM to

Referenc es

67

support their own growth, at the expense of normal bone homeostasis, leading to
increased fractures, hypercalcemia, spinal cord compression, and immune cell
dysfunction [150]. This fertile soil has been shown to be useful to cancer cells in
numerous ways, including providing protection from anticancer therapies through
cell adhesion mediated drug resistance (CAM‐DR). This occurs, in part, due to the
quiescent state induced in cells in the BM niche, allowing for long‐term survival of
malignant cells. Thus, cancer stemness is not a fixed entity, but can be instilled and
nurtured by the niche microenvironment. The soil also provides numerous other
growth factors that facilitate tumor quiescence or growth with the marrow; a clearer
understanding of what dictates if a tumor cell will remain dormant for years or
proliferate and initiate the vicious cycle is still needed. Importantly, the plasticity
of differentiation of putative cancer stem cells (CSCs) that may be driven by BM
interactions suggests that eradicating CSCs will not stop tumor growth, as more
CSCs may be reinitiated upon association with the HSC niche. Although evidence
for this is clear with leukemia initiating stem cells, the presence of stem cells or
tumor initiating cells remains controversial in other cancers, and hence the role of
the BM is likely be dependent on tumor type and clone properties.

Conclusions
This chapter discussed the causes of cancer in the following order: Genetic (somatic
and inherited), Epigenetic, Viral, and Environmental. We then summarized the
concept of Microenvironment‐Driven Oncogenesis (a novel paradigm), and tumor
heterogeneity and clonality, important tumor properties that make these exceedingly evasive. We then explored why it is that cancer, as a disease, is more than just
a result of mutations and uncontrolled cell growth, but also typically progresses
through stages of invasion and metastasis to other organs to carry out a full attack.
As part of this, we finally examined how tumors hijack and modulate their local
environment to support their own growth; without this capacity, cancer would not
be the terrible disease that it is.
References
1. Grivennikov, S.I., Greten, F.R., and Karin, M. (2010). Immunity, inflammation, and cancer. Cell
140: 883–899.
2. McGranahan, N. and Swanton, C. (2015). Biological and therapeutic impact of intratumor heterogeneity in cancer evolution. Cancer Cell 27: 15–26.
3. Hanahan, D. and Weinberg, R.A. (2000). The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100: 57–70.
4. Hanahan, D. and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 144:
646–674.
5. Parker, S.J. and Metallo, C.M. (2015). Metabolic consequences of oncogenic IDH mutations.
Pharmacology & Therapeutics 152: 54–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2015.05.003.

68

Causes of Cancer

6. Koschmieder, S., Halmos, B., Levantini, E. et al. (2009). Dysregulation of the C/EBPalpha
­differentiation pathway in human cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology 27: 619–628.
7. Ben‐Neriah, Y., Daley, G.Q., Mes‐Masson, A.M. et al. (1986). The chronic myelogenous leukemia‐
specific P210 protein is the product of the bcr/abl hybrid gene. Science 233: 212–214.
8. Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Mermel, C.H. et al. (2014). Discovery and saturation analysis of
cancer genes across 21 tumour types. Nature 505: 495–501.
9. Downward, J. (2003). Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nature Reviews.
Cancer 3: 11–22.
10. Parker, J.A. and Mattos, C. (2015). The Ras‐membrane interface: isoform‐specific differences in
the catalytic domain. Molecular Cancer Research 13: 595–603.
11. Bryant, K.L., Mancias, J.D., Kimmelman, A.C. et al. (2014). KRAS: feeding pancreatic cancer
proliferation. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 39: 91–100.
12. Gschwind, A., Fischer, O.M., and Ullrich, A. (2004). The discovery of receptor tyrosine kinases:
targets for cancer therapy. Nature Reviews. Cancer 4: 361–370.
13. Hojjat‐Farsangi, M. (2014). Small‐molecule inhibitors of the receptor tyrosine kinases: promising tools for targeted cancer therapies. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 15:
13768–13801.
14. Montemurro, F., Di Cosimo, S., and Arpino, G. (2013). Human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2)‐positive and hormone receptor‐positive breast cancer: new insights into molecular
interactions and clinical implications. Annals of Oncology 24: 2715–2724.
15. Qi, C.‐F., Kim, Y.S., Xiang, S. et al. (2012). Characterization of ARF‐BP1/HUWE1 interactions
with CTCF, MYC, ARF and p53 in MYC‐driven B cell neoplasms. International Journal of
Molecular Sciences 13: 6204–6219.
16. Xu, W. and Ji, J.‐Y. (2011). Dysregulation of CDK8 and cyclin C in tumorigenesis. Journal of
Genetics and Genomics 38: 439–452.
17. Akli, S. and Keyomarsi, K. Cyclin E and its low molecular weight forms in human cancer and as
targets for cancer therapy. Cancer Biology & Therapy 2: S38–S47.
18. Mukohara, T. (2015). PI3K mutations in breast cancer: prognostic and therapeutic implications.
Breast Cancer (Dove Med. Press.) 7: 111–123.
19. Duffy, M.J., Synnott, N.C., PM, M.G. et al. (2014). p53 as a target for the treatment of cancer.
Cancer Treatment Reviews 40: 1153–1160.
20. Bradner, J.E. (2015). Cancer: an essential passenger with p53. Nature 520: 626–627.
21. De Jong, M.C., Kors, W.A., de Graaf, P. et al. (2014). Trilateral retinoblastoma: a systematic
review and meta‐analysis. The Lancet Oncology 15: 1157–1167.
22. Walker, G.J., Flores, J.F., Glendening, J.M. et al. (1998). Virtually 100% of melanoma cell lines
harbor alterations at the DNA level within CDKN2A, CDKN2B, or one of their downstream
targets. Genes, Chromosomes & Cancer 22: 157–163.
23. Davis, R.J., Welcker, M., and Clurman, B.E. (2014). Tumor suppression by the Fbw7 ubiquitin
ligase: mechanisms and opportunities. Cancer Cell 26: 455–464.
24. Wu, R.‐C., Wang, T.‐L., and Shih, I.‐M. (2014). The emerging roles of ARID1A in tumor suppression. Cancer Biology & Therapy 15: 655–664.
25. Ng, S.B., Bigham, A.W., Buckingham, K.J. et al. (2010). Exome sequencing identifies MLL2
mutations as a cause of Kabuki syndrome. Nature Genetics 42: 790–793.
26. Tirode, F., Surdez, D., Ma, X. et al. (2014). Genomic landscape of Ewing sarcoma defines an
aggressive subtype with co‐association of STAG2 and TP53 mutations. Cancer Discovery 4:
1342–1353.
27. Liu, B., Zhang, Y., Jin, M. et al. (2010). Association of selected polymorphisms of CCND1, p21,
and caspase8 with colorectal cancer risk. Molecular Carcinogenesis 49: 75–84.
28. Abramowicz, A. and Gos, M. Neurofibromin in neurofibromatosis type 1 ‐ mutations in NF1gene
as a cause of disease. Developmental Period Medicine 18: 297–306.
29. Smith, A.G., Fan, W., Regen, L. et al. (2012). Somatic mutations in the HLA genes of patients
with hematological malignancy. Tissue Antigens 79: 359–366.

Referenc es

69

30. Bogdanovic, E. (2015). IDH1, lipid metabolism and cancer: shedding new light on old ideas.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1850: 1781–1785.
31. Moroishi, T., Hansen, C.G., and Guan, K.‐L. (2015). The emerging roles of YAP and TAZ in
cancer. Nature Reviews. Cancer 15: 73–79.
32. Webster, M.R. and Weeraratna, A.T. (2013). A Wnt‐er migration: the confusing role of β‐catenin
in melanoma metastasis. Science Signaling 6: pe11.
33. Chesi, M., Robbiani, D.F., Sebag, M. et al. (2008). AID‐dependent activation of a MYC transgene
induces multiple myeloma in a conditional mouse model of post‐germinal center malignancies.
Cancer Cell 13: 167–180.
34. Petrich, A.M., Nabhan, C., and Smith, S.M. (2014). MYC‐associated and double‐hit lymphomas:
a review of pathobiology, prognosis, and therapeutic approaches. Cancer 120: 3884–3895.
35. Sever, R. and Brugge, J.S. Signal transduction in cancer. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in
Medicine 5: a006098.
36. Brzeziańska, E., Pastuszak‐Lewandoska, D., and Lewiński, A. (2007). Rearrangements of
NTRK1 oncogene in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Neuro Endocrinology Letters 28: 221–229.
37. Sansal, I. and Sellers, W.R. (2004). The biology and clinical relevance of the PTEN tumor suppressor pathway. Journal of Clinical Oncology 22: 2954–2963.
38. Rodriguez, M., Siwko, S., Zeng, L. et al. (2015). Prostate‐specific G‐protein‐coupled receptor
collaborates with loss of PTEN to promote prostate cancer progression. Oncogene 35 (9): 1153–
1162. https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2015.170.
39. Fouqué, A., Debure, L., and Legembre, P. (2014). The CD95/CD95L signaling pathway: a role
in carcinogenesis. Biochemica et Biophysica Acta 1846: 130–141.
40. Wang, Y., Rathinam, R., Walch, A. et al. (2009). ST14 (suppression of tumorigenicity 14) gene
is a target for miR‐27b, and the inhibitory effect of ST14 on cell growth is independent of miR‐
27b regulation. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 284: 23094–23106.
41. Park, J.W., Zhao, L., Willingham, M. et al. (2015). Oncogenic mutations of thyroid hormone
receptor β. Oncotarget 6: 8115–8131.
42. Gleave, M., Hsieh, J.T., Gao, C.A. et al. (1991). Acceleration of human prostate cancer growth
in vivo by factors produced by prostate and bone fibroblasts. Cancer Research 51: 3753–3761.
43. Santen, R.J. (2011). Clinical review: effect of endocrine therapies on bone in breast cancer
patients. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 96 (2): 308–319. https://doi.
org/10.1210/jc.2010‐1679.
44. Kandoth, C., MD, M.L., Vandin, F. et al. (2013). Mutational landscape and significance across
12 major cancer types. Nature 502: 333–339.
45. Liu, Y., Zhang, X., Han, C. et al. (2015). TP53 loss creates therapeutic vulnerability in colorectal
cancer. Nature 520: 697–701.
46. Aloraifi, F., Boland, M.R., Green, A.J. et al. (2015). Gene analysis techniques and susceptibility
gene discovery in non‐BRCA1/BRCA2 familial breast cancer. Surgical Oncology https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.suronc.2015.04.003.
47. Kuchenbaecker, K.B., Ramus, S.J., Tyrer, J. et al. (2015). Identification of six new susceptibility
loci for invasive epithelial ovarian cancer. Nature Genetics 47: 164–171.
48. Hirasawa, A., Masuda, K., Akahane, T. et al. (2014). Family history and BRCA1/BRCA2 status
among Japanese ovarian cancer patients and occult cancer in a BRCA1 mutant case. Japanese
Journal of Clinical Oncology 44: 49–56.
49. Polprasert, C., Schulze, L., Sekeres, M.A. et al. (2015). Inherited and somatic defects in DDX41
in myeloid neoplasms. Cancer Cell https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2015.03.017.
50. Benusiglio, P.R., Couvé, S., Gilbert‐Dussardier, B. et al. (2015). A germline mutation in PBRM1
predisposes to renal cell carcinoma. Journal of Medical Genetics https://doi.org/10.1136/
jmedgenet‐2014‐102912.
51. Moes‐Sosnowska, J., Szafron, L., Nowakowska, D. et al. (2015). Germline SMARCA4 mutations in patients with ovarian small cell carcinoma of hypercalcemic type. Orphanet Journal of
Rare Diseases 10: 32.

70

Causes of Cancer

52. Sei, Y., Zhao, X., Forbes, J. et al. (2015). A hereditary form of small intestinal carcinoid associated with a germline mutation in inositol polyphosphate multikinase. Gastroenterology https://
doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2015.04.008.
53. Pinheiro, H., Oliveira, C., Seruca, R. et al. (2014). Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer ‐ pathophysiology and clinical management. Best Practice & Research. Clinical Gastroenterology 28:
1055–1068.
54. Pinheiro, H., Oliveira, P., and Oliveira, C. (2015). Hereditary cancer risk assessment: challenges
for the next‐gen sequencing era. Frontiers in Oncology 5: 62.
55. Mazzoni, S.M. and Fearon, E.R. (2014). AXIN1 and AXIN2 variants in gastrointestinal cancers.
Cancer Letters 355: 1–8.
56. Balaguer, F., Castellvi‐Bel, S., Castells, A. et al. (2007). Identification of MYH mutation carriers
in colorectal cancer: a multicenter, case‐control, population‐based study. Clinical
Gastroenterology and Hepatology 5: 379–387.
57. Stoffel, E.M. (2015). Screening in GI cancers: the role of genetics. Journal of Clinical Oncology
33 (16): 1721–1728. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2014.60.6764.
58. Mastoraki, A., Chatzimavridou‐Grigoriadou, V., Chatzipetrou, V. et al. (2014). Familial pancreatic cancer: challenging diagnostic approach and therapeutic management. Journal of
Gastrointestinal Cancer 45: 256–261.
59. Hansen, C.B., Wadge, L.M., Lowstuter, K. et al. (2004). Clinical germline genetic testing for
melanoma. The Lancet Oncology 5: 314–319.
60. Smith, M.J. (2015). Germline and somatic mutations in meningiomas. Cancer Genetics https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.02.003.
61. Gonzalez, K.D., Noltner, K.A., Buzin, C.H. et al. (2009). Beyond Li Fraumeni syndrome: clinical characteristics of families with p53 germline mutations. Journal of Clinical Oncology 27:
1250–1256.
62. Cascón, A., Comino‐Méndez, I., Currás‐Freixes, M. et al. (2015). Whole‐exome sequencing
identifies MDH2 as a new familial paraganglioma gene. Journal of the National Cancer Institute
107: djv053.
63. Merino, D. and Malkin, D. (2014). p53 and hereditary cancer. Sub‐Cellular Biochemistry 85: 1–16.
64. You, J.S. and Jones, P.A. (2012). Cancer genetics and epigenetics: two sides of the same coin?
Cancer Cell 22: 9–20.
65. Roccaro, A.M., Sacco, A., Thompson, B. et al. (2009). MicroRNAs 15a and 16 regulate tumor
proliferation in multiple myeloma. Blood 113: 6669–6680.
66. Cheng, C.J., Bahak, R., Babar, I.A. et al. (2014). MicroRNA silencing for cancer therapy targeted to the tumour microenvironment. Nature 518: 107–110.
67. Reagan, M.R. and Ghobrial, I.M. (2012). Multiple myeloma‐mesenchymal stem cells: characterization, origin, and tumor‐promoting effects. Clinical Cancer Research 18: 342–349.
68. Reagan, M.R., Mishima, Y., Glavey, S.V. et al. (2014). Investigating osteogenic differentiation in
multiple myeloma using a novel 3D bone marrow niche model. Blood 124: 3250–3259.
69. Fiskus, W., Sharma, S., Qi, J. et al. (2014). Highly active combination of BRD4 antagonist and
histone deacetylase inhibitor against human acute myelogenous leukemia cells. Molecular
Cancer Therapeutics 13: 1142–1154.
70. Stubbs, M.C., Kim, W., Bariteasu, M. et al. (2015). Selective inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2
as a potential therapeutic option for B‐ALL. Clinical Cancer Research 21 (10): 2348–2358.
https://doi.org/10.1158/1078‐0432.CCR‐14‐1290.
71. Amabile, G., Di Ruscio, A., Müller, F. et al. (2015). Dissecting the role of aberrant DNA methylation in human leukaemia. Nature Communications 6: 7091.
72. Hibner, U. and Grégoire, D. (2015). Viruses in cancer cell plasticity: the role of hepatitis C virus
in hepatocellular carcinoma. Contemporary Oncology (Pozn) 19: A62–A67.
73. Stier, E.A., Sebring, M.C., Mendez, A.E. et al. (2015). Prevalence of anal human papillomavirus
infection and anal HPV‐related disorders in women: a systematic review. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2015.03.034.

Referenc es

71

74. Rusan, M., Li, Y.Y., and Hammerman, P.S. (2015). Genomic landscape of human papillomavirus‐associated cancers. Clinical Cancer Research 21: 2009–2019.
75. Smola, S. (2014). Human papillomaviruses and skin cancer. Advanced Experimental Medicine
and Biology 810: 192–207.
76. MacLachlan, J.H. and Cowie, B.C. Hepatitis B virus epidemiology. Cold Spring Harbor
Perspectives in Medicine 5: a021410.
77. Hsu, Y.‐C., Chun‐Ying, W., and Lin, J.‐T. (2014). Hepatitis C virus infection, antiviral therapy,
and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. Seminars in Oncology 42: 329–338.
78. Bhutani, M., Polizzotto, M.N., Uldrick, T.S. et al. (2015). Kaposi sarcoma‐associated herpesvirus‐associated malignancies: epidemiology, pathogenesis, and advances in treatment. Seminars
in Oncology 42: 223–246.
79. De Martel, C., Ferlay, J., Vranceschi, S. et al. (2012). Global burden of cancers attributable to
infections in 2008: a review and synthetic analysis. The Lancet Oncology 13: 607–615.
80. Batinica, M., Akgül, B., Silling, S. et al. (2015). Correlation of Merkel cell polyomavirus
positivity with PDGFRα mutations and survivin expression in Merkel cell carcinoma.
Journal of Dermatological Science 79 (1): 43–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jdermsci.2015.04.002.
81. Ferris, D., Samakoses, R., Block, S.L. et al. (2014). Long‐term study of a quadrivalent human
papillomavirus vaccine. Pediatrics 134: e657–e665.
82. Aggarwal, B.B., Vijayalekshmi, R.V., and Sung, B. (2009). Targeting inflammatory pathways for
prevention and therapy of cancer: short‐term friend, long‐term foe. Clinical Cancer Research 15:
425–430.
83. Yu, Y., Champer, J., Beynet, D. et al. (2015). The role of the cutaneous microbiome in skin cancer: lessons learned from the gut. Journal of Drugs in Dermatology 14: 461–465.
84. O’Keefe, S.J.D., Li, J.V., Lahti, L. et al. (2015). Fat, fibre and cancer risk in African Americans
and rural Africans. Nature Communications 6: 6342.
85. Hackshaw, A.K., Law, M.R., and Wald, N.J. (1997). The accumulated evidence on lung cancer
and environmental tobacco smoke. British Medical Journal 315: 980–988.
86. Stinn, W., Berges, A., Meurrens, K. et al. (2013). Towards the validation of a lung tumorigenesis
model with mainstream cigarette smoke inhalation using the A/J mouse. Toxicology 305: 49–64.
87. Witschi, H., Espiritu, I., Dance, S.T. et al. (2002). A mouse lung tumor model of tobacco smoke
carcinogenesis. Toxicological Sciences 68: 322–330.
88. Keast, D., Ayre, D.J., and Papadimitriou, J.M. (1981). A survey of pathological changes associated with long‐term high tar tobacco smoke exposure in a murine model. The Journal of
Pathology 135: 249–257.
89. Fortunato, L. and Rushton, L. (2015). Stomach cancer and occupational exposure to asbestos: a
meta‐analysis of occupational cohort studies. British Journal of Cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/
bjc.2014.599.
90. Baur, X., Soskolne, C.L., Lemen, R.A. et al. (2015). How conflicted authors undermine the
World Health Organization (WHO) campaign to stop all use of asbestos: spotlight on studies
showing that chrysotile is carcinogenic and facilitates other non‐cancer asbestos‐related diseases. International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health 37: 176–179.
91. Lenters, V., Vermeulen, R., Dogger, S. et al. (2011). A meta‐analysis of asbestos and lung cancer:
is better quality exposure assessment associated with steeper slopes of the exposure‐response
relationships? Environmental Health Perspectives 119: 1547–1555.
92. Robinson, C., Alfonso, H., Woo, S. et al. (2014). Effect of NSAIDS and COX‐2 inhibitors on the
incidence and severity of asbestos‐induced malignant mesothelioma: evidence from an animal
model and a human cohort. Lung Cancer 86: 29–34.
93. Robinson, C., Alfonso, H., Woo, S. et al. (2014). Statins do not alter the incidence of mesothelioma in asbestos exposed mice or humans. PLoS One 9: e103025.
94. Guyton, K.Z., Loomis, D., Grosse, Y. et al. (2015). Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, malathion, diazinon, and glyphosate. The Lancet Oncology 16: 490–491.

72

Causes of Cancer

95. Salerno, C., Carcagni, A., Sacco, S. et al. (2015). An Italian population‐based case‐control
study on the association between farming and cancer: are pesticides a plausible risk factor?
Archives of Environmental & Occupational Health https://doi.org/10.1080/19338244.2015.
1027808.
96. Schinasi, L. and Leon, M.E. (2014). Non‐Hodgkin lymphoma and occupational exposure to
agricultural pesticide chemical groups and active ingredients: a systematic review and meta‐
analysis. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 11: 4449–4527.
97. Zendehdel, R., Tayefeh‐Rahimian, R., and Kabir, A. (2014). Chronic exposure to chlorophenol
related compounds in the pesticide production workplace and lung cancer: a meta‐analysis.
Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention 15: 5149–5153.
98. George, J. and Shukla, Y. (2013). Early changes in proteome levels upon acute deltamethrin
exposure in mammalian skin system associated with its neoplastic transformation potential.
The Journal of Toxicological Sciences 38: 629–642.
99. National Toxicology Program 2011. Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of diethylamine
(CAS No. 109–89‐7) in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice (inhalation studies). Natl. Toxicol.
Program Tech. Rep. Ser. 1–174. at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22127322.
100. Song, L. et al. (2014). The organochlorine p,p’‐dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane induces colorectal cancer growth through Wnt/β‐catenin signaling. Toxicology Letters 229: 284–291.
101. Song, L., Zhao, J., Xiaoting, J. et al. (2014). p, p’‐Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene induces
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell proliferation through oxidative stress. PLoS One 9: e112700.
102. Jin, J., Yu, M., Hu, C. et al. (2014). Pesticide exposure as a risk factor for myelodysplastic syndromes: a meta‐analysis based on 1,942 cases and 5,359 controls. PLoS One 9: e110850.
103. Astagimath, M.N. and Rao, S.B. (2004). Dietary restriction (DR) and its advantages. Indian
Journal of Clinical Biochemistry 19: 1–5.
104. Kritchevsky, D. Caloric restriction and experimental mammary carcinogenesis. Breast Cancer
Research and Treatment 46: 161–167.
105. Lwin, S.T., Olechnowicz, S.W.Z., Fowler, J.A. et al. (2015). Diet‐induced obesity promotes a
myeloma‐like condition in vivo. Leukemia 29: 507–510.
106. Yang, Y., Zhang, D., Feng, N. et al. (2014). Increased intake of vegetables, but not fruit, reduces
risk for hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta‐analysis. Gastroenterology 147: 1031–1042.
107. Tárraga López, P.J., Albero, J.S., and Rodríguez‐Montes, J.A. (2014). Primary and secondary
prevention of colorectal cancer. Clinical Medicine Insights. Gastroenterology 7: 33–46.
108. Takahashi, H., Hosono, K., Endo, H. et al. (2013). Colon epithelial proliferation and carcinogenesis in diet‐induced obesity. Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 28 (Suppl 4): 41–47.
109. Turner, D.P. (2015). Advanced glycation end‐products: a biological consequence of lifestyle
contributing to cancer disparity. Cancer Research 75 (10): 1925–1929. https://doi.
org/10.1158/0008‐5472.CAN‐15‐0169.
110. Zakhari, S. and Hoek, J.B. (2015). Alcohol and breast cancer: reconciling epidemiological and
molecular data. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 815: 7–39.
111. Rota, M., Porta, L., Pelucchi, C. et al. (2014). Alcohol drinking and risk of leukemia‐a systematic review and meta‐analysis of the dose‐risk relation. Cancer Epidemiology 38: 339–345.
112. Rota, M., Porta, L., Pelucchi, C. et al. (2014). Alcohol drinking and multiple myeloma risk–a
systematic review and meta‐analysis of the dose‐risk relationship. European Journal of Cancer
Prevention 23: 113–121.
113. Gonzales, J.F., Barnard, N.D., Jenkins, D.J. et al. (2014). Applying the precautionary principle
to nutrition and cancer. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 33: 239–246.
114. Li, Y., Mao, Y., Zhang, Y. et al. (2014). Alcohol drinking and upper aerodigestive tract cancer
mortality: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Oral Oncology 50: 269–275.
115. Mercer, K.E., Hennings, L., and Ronis, M.J.J. (2015). Alcohol consumption, Wnt/β‐catenin
signaling, and hepatocarcinogenesis. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 815:
185–195.

Referenc es

73

116. Mancebo, S.E., Hu, J.Y., and Wang, S.Q. (2014). Sunscreens: a review of health benefits, regulations, and controversies. Dermatologic Clinics 32: 427–438.
117. Reichrath, J. and Reichrath, S. (2014). Sunlight, vitamin D and malignant melanoma: an update.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 810: 390–405.
118. Mancebo, S.E. and Wang, S.Q. (2014). Skin cancer: role of ultraviolet radiation in carcinogenesis. Reviews on Environmental Health 29: 265–273.
119. Ellekilde, M., Selfjord, E., Larsen, C.S. et al. (2014). Transfer of gut microbiota from lean and
obese mice to antibiotic‐treated mice. Scientific Reports 4: 5922.
120. Sankpal, U.T., Pius, H., Khan, M. et al. (2012). Environmental factors in causing human cancers: emphasis on tumorigenesis. Tumour Biology 33: 1265–1274.
121. McGlynn, K.A., Petrick, J.L., and London, W.T. (2015). Global epidemiology. Clinics in Liver
Disease 19: 223–238.
122. Durko, L. and Malecka‐Panas, E. (2014). Lifestyle modifications and colorectal cancer. Current
Colorectal Cancer Reports 10: 45–54.
123. Nagaraju, G.P., Aliya, S., and Alese, O.B. (2015). Role of adiponectin in obesity related gastrointestinal carcinogenesis. Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 26: 83–93.
124. Inoue, M. and Tsugane, S. (2012). Insulin resistance and cancer: epidemiological evidence.
Endocrine‐Related Cancer 19: F1–F8.
125. Gao, Y., Huang, Y.B., Liu, X.O. et al. (2013). Tea consumption, alcohol drinking and physical
activity associations with breast cancer risk among Chinese females: a systematic review and
meta‐analysis. Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention 14: 7543–7550.
126. Kruk, J. and Duchnik, E. (2014). Oxidative stress and skin diseases: possible role of physical
activity. Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention 15: 561–568.
127. Filaire, E., Dupuis, C., Galvaing, G. et al. (2013). Lung cancer: what are the links with oxidative
stress, physical activity and nutrition. Lung Cancer 82: 383–389.
128. Claxton, L.D. (2014). The history, genotoxicity, and carcinogenicity of carbon‐based fuels and
their emissions: part 5. Summary, comparisons, and conclusions. Mutation Research/Reviews
in Mutation Research 763: 103–147.
129. Morris, R.D. (1995). Drinking water and cancer. Environmental Health Perspectives 103
(Suppl): 225–231.
130. Lee, J., Kuk, J.L., and Ardern, C.I. (2015). The relationship between changes in sitting time and
mortality in post‐menopausal US women. Journal of Public Health (Oxford, England) https://
doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdv055.
131. Kang, Y. and Pantel, K. (2013). Tumor cell dissemination: emerging biological insights from
animal models and cancer patients. Cancer Cell 23: 573–581.
132. Raaijmakers, M.H.G.P., Mukherjee, S., Guo, S. et al. (2010). Bone progenitor dysfunction
induces myelodysplasia and secondary leukaemia. Nature 464: 852–857.
133. Raaijmakers, M.H.G.P. (2012). Myelodysplastic syndromes: revisiting the role of the bone marrow microenvironment in disease pathogenesis. International Journal of Hematology 95: 17–25.
134. Varadhachary, G.R. (2011). Carcinoma of unknown primary: focused evaluation. Journal of the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network 9: 1406–1412.
135. Narayanan, N.K., Duan, B., Butcher, J.T. et al. (2014). Characterization of multiple myeloma
clonal cell expansion and stromal Wnt/β‐catenin signaling in hyaluronic acid‐based 3D hydrogel. In Vivo 28: 67–73.
136. Moreau, J.E., Anderson, K., Mauney, J.R. et al. (2007). Tissue‐engineered bone serves as a
target for metastasis of human breast cancer in a mouse model. Cancer Research 67: 10304.
137. Lu, X. and Kang, Y. (2007). Organotropism of breast cancer metastasis. Journal of Mammary
Gland Biology and Neoplasia 12: 153–162.
138. Lu, X. and Kang, Y. (2009). Efficient acquisition of dual metastasis organotropism to bone and
lung through stable spontaneous fusion between MDA‐MB‐231 variants. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106: 9385–9390.

74

Causes of Cancer

139. Swami, A., Reagan, M.R., Basto, P. et al. (2014). Engineered nanomedicine for myeloma and
bone microenvironment targeting. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 111: 10287–10292.
140. Maiso, P., Huynh, D., Maschetta, M. et al. (2015). Metabolic signature identifies novel targets
for drug resistance in multiple myeloma. Cancer Research https://doi.org/10.1158/0008‐5472.
CAN‐14‐3400.
141. Azab, A.K., Hu, J., Quang, P. et al. (2012). Hypoxia promotes dissemination of multiple myeloma through acquisition of epithelial to mesenchymal transition‐like features. Blood 119:
5782–5794.
142. Topalian, S.L., Drake, C.G., and Pardoll, D.M. (2015). Immune checkpoint blockade: a common denominator approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 27: 450–461.
143. Kawano, Y., Moschetta, M., Manier, S. et al. (2015). Targeting the bone marrow microenvironment in multiple myeloma. Immunological Reviews 263: 160–172.
144. Glavey, S.V., Manier, S., Natoni, A. et al. (2014). The sialyltransferase ST3GAL6 influences
homing and survival in multiple myeloma. Blood https://doi.org/10.1182/blood‐2014‐03‐560862.
145. Reagan, M.R., Liaw, L., Rosen, C.J. et al. (2015). Dynamic interplay between bone and multiple myeloma: emerging roles of the osteoblast. Bone 75: 161–169.
146. Olechnowicz, S.W.Z. and Edwards, C.M. (2014). Contributions of the host microenvironment
to cancer‐induced bone disease. Cancer Research 74: 1625–1631.
147. Ribatti, D., Moschetta, M., and Vacca, A. (2014). Macrophages in multiple myeloma.
Immunology Letters 161: 241–244.
148. Guise, T.A., Mohammad, K.S., Clines, G. et al. (2006). Basic mechanisms responsible for osteolytic and osteoblastic bone metastases. Clinical Cancer Research 12: 6213s–6216s.
149. Weilbaecher, K.N., Guise, T.A., and McCauley, L.K. (2011). Cancer to bone: a fatal attraction.
Nature Reviews. Cancer 11: 411–425.
150. Roodman, G.D. (2012). Genes associate with abnormal bone cell activity in bone metastasis.
Cancer Metastasis Reviews 31: 569–578.

III
A Cancer Diagnosis

4
Early Warning Signs
Solomon A. Graf1,2,3 and F. Marc Stewart1,2
1

Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA, USA
2
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
3
Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA

Introduction
Cancer encompasses a broad array of diseases and states of health. It can affect
any tissue in the body and consequently can cause virtually any symptom. The
evolution and proliferation of neoplastic, or abnormal, cells occurs stepwise
toward an increasingly unregulated behavior that ceases to work in harmony with
the host, or body, and instead sets its own course. This course defines the signs
and symptoms of each cancer and, ultimately, its impact on a patient’s life. As a
rule, the earlier in a cancer’s course that it is detected, the greater the likelihood
that it can be effectively managed. Cancer screening, a preventative health measure instituted on a public health scale, has saved countless lives since its inception
several decades ago. Despite this, the vast majority of cancers are not identified
during scheduled screening but rather by patients themselves. This chapter will
explore the nature of the initial symptoms of cancer and the challenges inherent
in cancer diagnosis.

Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

77

78

Early Warning Sign s

Early Detection: Techniques
The 2013 film “Elysium” features a futuristic scene in which a machine scans a
human body from head to toe, declares the detection of cancer cells, and then
eradicates them as it might viruses on a personal computer. This fantasy captures a
core ideal of oncology, or cancer medicine: namely, every cancer originates in a
single cell, and the ability to identify and destroy these cells at their inception
would render the disease obsolete. In practice, we are limited in our ability to
detect cancerous cells by available technology and its cost.
In 1895 Wilhelm Roentgen used X‐rays to image internal structures of the
human body. Within months of its report the technology was being employed on
the battlefield to locate bullets in wounded soldiers and, soon thereafter, in identifying other abnormalities, including tumors. Today, a variety of imaging techniques are used to detect cancer at early stages. Mammograms are X‐ray images of
breast tissue and since the 1950s have been detecting tumors in the breast before
they can be identified by the patient or physician. Computed tomography (CT), or
CT‐scanning, compiles and processes many rapidly acquired X‐ray images to render cross‐sectional imaging of sections of the body. With the interpretation of a
radiologist, these images reliably show abnormalities as small as a centimeter
across, or less.
Other techniques for cancer screening do not require radiology. In 1923 George
Papanicolaou described his technique of brushing the cervix of a woman to collect
cells that could then be stained and examined under a microscope. Though it was
not widely adopted until the 1960s, this technique is largely responsible for the
approximately 70% reduction in cervical cancer death in the United States in the
last 30 years [1]. Cancer of the colon and rectum, the second most deadly cancer in
this country (behind lung cancer) is effectively screened with a colonoscopy, a
procedure in which a thin, flexible tube is passed through the colon to visualize the
epithelium, or lining, of the tract, and even allow for minimally invasive surgical
removal of abnormal growths. Indeed, it is the one cancer screening technique that
can double as a treatment procedure.
While screening for cancers of the breast, cervix, and colon are of proven benefit and universally recommended depending on a patient’s age, certain situations
constitute high enough risk to warrant additional screening measures. Patients with
liver disease and viral hepatitis are at increased risk for liver cancer and undergo
periodic examinations with blood tests and ultrasound exams. The blood tests
include analyzing for the marker alpha‐fetoprotein, a glycoprotein that while normally absent in adults can be secreted by cancerous liver cells and lead to elevated
levels in the blood plasma. Additionally, patients with known genetic lesions that
predispose them to develop cancer in particular organs at an early age, such as
mutations in the BRCA gene or the PTEN gene, may be recommended to undergo
ultrasound screening of the ovaries, thyroid, or kidneys. A medical geneticist, a
physician specially trained in uncommon genetic syndromes, often assists in guiding screening programs for such individuals.

Ge ne ral Sign s and Symptom s

79

General Signs and Symptoms
Though cancer screening methods are increasingly effective and efficient, most
cancers are found because they have either caused a physical sign observed by
someone else (such as a spouse or a physician) or a symptom experienced by the
patient. The signs and symptoms of cancer are diverse, and can inform both the
origin and stage of a cancer. Essentially any cancer type can cause fatigue, fever,
reduced appetite, weight loss, and fevers. These symptoms reflect the cancer’s
production of inflammatory chemicals known as cytokines that circulate through
the bloodstream. In more advanced cases, these symptoms result in cancer cachexia,
a hypercatabolic state (condition of excess metabolic activity) in which normal
tissues, including lean body mass, waste away, even if a patient is consuming a
relatively normal amount of food. Cancer cachexia is a complication of late‐stage
cancer, and can be profoundly debilitating. Its reversal depends on successful
­control of the underlying malignancy which itself can be compromised by these
symptoms. Potentially effective treatments for the cancer such as surgery and
chemotherapy may need to be minimized or foregone altogether if patients are so
weakened by cancer cachexia that the treatment would risk too much harm.
Designation of patient’s performance status according to how active and independent he or she is summarizes these symptoms (and other aspects of a patient’s
­condition such as age and other medical problems) and is used to predict how well
a patient will tolerate the toxicities of therapy.
Certain cancers are more prone to cause such systemic signs and symptoms.
Hematologic cancers, or cancers of the blood and blood‐forming organs, frequently
cause fevers, drenching night sweats, and abnormal weight loss, which in such a
situation is defined as an unintentional loss of at least 10% of the normal body
weight over six months or less. Indeed, these symptoms are collectively referred to
as B symptoms and are associated with lymphomas, in particular. A standard classification scheme of lymphomas, the Ann Arbor staging system, factors in the
presence of B symptoms in assigning disease stage, as their presence is associated
with a more aggressive and difficult‐to‐treat disease.
These general signs and symptoms of cancer are not unique to cancer; they are
present in many other systemic illnesses, as well. The influenza virus, for example,
classically causes many of these aforementioned B symptoms but typically is self‐
limited, with improvement after several days or a week. The persistence of these
signs or symptoms over weeks or months must raise concern for the existence of
underlying cancer, but can also occur in cases of uncontrolled chronic infections
such as tuberculosis or endocarditis and autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematous. As a result, the cause of these signs and
symptoms is often not immediately apparent to healthcare providers presented
with such complaints and no additional clues. The level of suspicion for an underlying cancer, which itself is influenced by the patient’s age, family history, risk
factors such as cigarette smoking history, and overall appearance and physical
exam, dictates the breadth and depth of medical evaluation. Such an evaluation

80

Early Warning Sign s

typically is performed in a tiered fashion, initially involving a comprehensive exam
and basic blood work (investigating the numbers of red blood cells, white blood
cells, kidney function, and liver function) and graduating to more involved testing,
such as with specialized blood tests and a CT or ultrasound scan either to hone in
on a suspected diagnosis or in the uncommon instances in which the initial evaluation is unrevealing. Nevertheless, general signs and symptoms of cancer often
require multiple discussions and the persistence of the patient and the patient’s
doctor to establish the diagnosis.
One example of the potential complexity of such a situation is a venous thrombus, or a blood clot found in the veins. Venous thromboses can cause local symptoms in an extremity, for instance swelling and pain in a leg, and on occasion break
off and travel, or embolize, to the lungs, putting a patient at risk for shortness of
breath, chest pain, and even death. Venous thromboses are quite uncommon in the
general population – approximately three such events occur for every 10 000 years
of life in people who do not possess any risk factors, but the risk increases 10 or
even 100 fold in individuals who are predisposed to venous thromboses, such as in
the setting of a recent orthopedic surgery or a strong family history of venous
thromboses. Cancer, probably because of the circulating inflammatory factors it is
associated with, also substantially increases the risk for developing a venous
thrombus [2]. Interestingly, certain cancers such as pancreatic cancer appear to
confer a much higher risk for venous thrombosis than other cancers, such as the
prostate. Because of the clear association between venous thrombosis and malignancy, some experts advocate for undertaking a search for an underlying cancer in
patients in whom a venous thrombosis is diagnosed with no alternative risk factor.
There is no evidence, however, to suggest that identifying a cancer through such an
investigation leads to better treatment and control of the cancer, presumably since
such a diagnosis is often of advanced‐stage disease for which limited treatments
are available.
Cancer that spreads, or metastasizes, far from its site of origin tends to do so
either through the lymph system (lymphatic metastasis) or blood (hematogenous
metastasis). Lymph node metastases represent deposits of cancer and cause
enlargement of the nodes. Depending on their proximity to the skin, these lymph
nodes may appear as lumps or masses that are usually initially painless.
Metastases spread hematogenously and are liable to grow anywhere in the body
but, due to the architecture of the vascular system, find residence first in the liver
or the lungs.

Organ‐specific Signs and Symptoms
Tumors by their nature are unregulated in their proliferation and spread. They
ignore boundaries of normal tissues, invade or compress anatomic structures, and
in doing so can damage healthy organ function.

Organ‐specific Sign s and Symptom s

81

Central Nervous System
The most dramatic example of symptoms resulting from compression by tumor is
in the case of cancers that grow in or against the central nervous system, which is
comprised of the brain and spinal cord. Essentially any kind of tumor can do this,
though lung cancer, breast cancer, and prostate cancer are most commonly responsible. Tumors that compress the thecal sac surrounding the spinal cord (or in the
low back, the cauda equina, which are nerve roots stemming from the bottom of
the spinal cord and extending down through the spinal canal to the level of the
pelvis) can cause severe pain and damage to the nerves resulting in loss of sensation, loss of strength, and incontinence of bowel and bladder. These neurological
deficits can become permanent within a matter of hours of their onset. Spinal cord
compression by cancer, therefore, which first manifests usually in the form of back
pain with or without extension of pain down a limb, is therefore considered a medical emergency and requires immediate radiographic diagnosis and treatment with
medications (steroids relieve some of the inflammation associated with the tumors)
and, often, surgical and radiation therapy.
Tumors in the brain may arise from brain cells (such as glioblastoma multiforme) in which case they are referred to as primary brain tumors, or may have
spread, or metastasized, from other sites of disease. They can cause headaches,
seizures, nausea, and visual disturbances due to increased pressure inside the skull;
depending on the exact location of lesions within the brain, symptoms similar to a
stroke can also manifest, such as deficits in language, thinking, or balance.
Lung Cancer
Most commonly, the first signs and symptoms of cancer correspond to the organ
that gave rise to the malignancy. In the lungs, tumors replace functional alveoli, the
structure that exchanges carbon dioxide for oxygen, and can lead to shortness of
breath, particularly with exertion. Approximately 50% of patients newly diagnosed
with lung cancer describe this complaint at the time of their initial presentation.
Lung tumors also cause localized irritation and inflammation triggering a cough,
particularly if the tumor is located centrally in the chest, in the vicinity of larger
airways; if the tumors invade blood vessels, patients may cough up sputum tinged
or streaked with blood. Since lung cancer is strongly associated with smoking, it
can be challenging to determine whether such symptoms are a result of lung cancer
or other diseases of smoking, such as emphysema or bronchitis. Moreover, all of
these conditions predispose to infection, which in the setting of lung cancer can
result from a tumor blocking the expectoration of bacteria‐filled sputum, a condition termed post‐obstructive pneumonia. As with any cancer, lung cancer can also
grow against and into nerves and bones, resulting in significant, often unremitting,
pain. Up to 20% of patients are found to have involvement of the skeleton by the
lung cancer at the time of their diagnosis.

82

Early Warning Sign s

On occasion, tumors in the right lung can push on the superior vena cava, the
blood vessel that returns blood from much of the upper half of the body to the
heart. This compression, termed superior vena cava syndrome, causes congestion of venous return and swelling in the head, neck, and upper torso. A Pancoast
tumor, named after the radiologist Henry Pancoast who described the phenomenon in the 1920s, describes a tumor found at the very top of the lungs. This area
is an important thoroughfare for key nervous pathways and so a variety of neurological deficits can ensue. These include Horner’s syndrome, characterized by
one‐sided pupillary constriction, eyelid drooping, enopthalmos (sunken eyeball),
and anhidrosis (lack of sweating); Pancoast syndrome, characterized by compression of the nerves supplying the arm, resulting in pain and weakness in the
limb; and hoarseness due to damage of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which
controls the larynx. Physicians who are presented with these symptoms, particularly in patients older in age and with a history of smoking, should be on the
look‐out for lung cancer and have a low threshold to perform diagnostic testing
with a chest X‐ray or CT scan. Indeed, the link between cigarette smoking and
lung cancer is so strong that even in the absence of any concerning symptoms,
patients with a significant smoking history may benefit from screening CT scans
performed in asymptomatic individuals to identify early and potentially curable
lung cancers [3].
Colorectal Cancer
Cancer of the colon or rectum represents the classic example of stepwise development of cancer from normal cells: typically over the course of years normal epithelium, the cells that line the surface of an organ, acquire alterations in genes that
lead initially to hyperplasia (excess number of microscopically normal‐appearing
cells), then the development of an adenoma (an abnormal, but benign, tumor), and,
ultimately, carcinoma (a malignant tumor derived from epithelium). As such, cancer of the colon or rectum can frequently be prevented with a regular screening
endoscopy, a minor medical procedure in which a camera is passed through the
rectum and colon to visualize the epithelium and allow for biopsies and removal of
abnormal appearing lesions before they become cancerous.
Colorectal cancers that develop despite screening measures or in patients that do
not engage in routine screening can cause symptoms such as blood in the stool,
abdominal pain, and changes in bowel function. Constipation associated with nausea and vomiting occurs in a small proportion of patients that develop bowel
obstruction due to their colorectal cancer, a severe complication that requires
prompt surgical attention. Most commonly, the first sign of colorectal cancer is an
iron‐deficiency anemia, often accompanied by fatigue, due to occult and intermittent loss of small amounts of blood in the stool. A diagnosis of iron‐deficiency
anemia is common in the population at large and might reflect blood loss due to
menstruation or iron deficiency due to limitations in intestinal absorption or d­ ietary

Organ‐specific Sign s and Symptom s

83

restrictions. In the absence of such explanations, therefore, endoscopic evaluation
may be indicated to look for a cancer of the gastrointestinal tract. Similar to other
malignancies, colorectal cancer in the most advanced stages metastasizes, first to
regional lymph nodes and eventually to distant sites such as the liver, the lungs, and
the peritoneum, or the membrane lining of the inside of the abdomen. Spread to
these organs can cause, respectively, pain in the upper‐right quadrant of the abdomen with or without jaundice, a cough or shortness of breath, and symptoms of
abdominal distension resulting from an accumulation of ascites, or fluid in the
abdomen. Approximately one in five patients with colorectal cancer in the United
States have distant, metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis.
Other Cancers of the Gastrointestinal System
In addition to the colon and rectum, the pancreas, liver, stomach, and esophagus
can develop cancer with symptoms specific to the site of origin. Cancer of the pancreas is notorious for causing pain, even from small tumors. Pancreatic cancer pain
is typically located in the middle of the abdomen and often radiates, or gives the
sensation of traveling, to the sides or back. Jaundice due to compression of a bile
duct from the pancreatic tumor, weight loss, and fatigue commonly accompany
pancreatic cancer, as well. As noted above, blood clots are a frequent complication
of advanced pancreatic cancer; Trousseau’s Syndrome, the phenomenon of multiple episodes of blood clots associated with blood vessel inflammation and tenderness is classically associated with pancreatic cancer.
Hepatocellular carcinoma, or cancer of the liver, is associated with chronic liver
diseases including cirrhosis and viral hepatitis; as noted above, patients with these
underlying conditions should receive periodic screening for liver cancer with
imaging and blood tests for alpha fetoprotein. Hepatocellular carcinoma can tip a
marginally functioning liver into failure. Symptoms of liver failure including confusion, ascites, and jaundice in the setting of previously stable liver disease may
warrant evaluation for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract including the stomach and esophagus
can cause iron‐deficiency anemia from blood loss similar to colorectal cancer.
Owing to blockage of the swallowing mechanism, tumors in the esophagus and
first portion of the stomach sometimes cause dysphagia, or difficulty swallowing,
and odynophagia, or pain with swallowing, and so lead to significant weight loss
and malnourishment. Nausea and early satiety, or the sensation of being full after
ingesting a small meal, may arise from tumors that inhibit the emptying of the
stomach into the small intestine, termed gastric outlet obstruction. Virchow’s node,
a lymph node found in the left supraclavicular fossa (the area above the collarbone
on the left), receives lymph from the upper gastrointestinal tract. The node is
named after Rudolf Virchow, a German pathologist, who observed that cancers in
the abdomen, especially the stomach, present with enlargement of this node due to
the lymph drainage pattern.

84

Early Warning Sign s

Breast Cancer
Comprising more than 20% of all invasive cancers in women, breast cancer is the
single most common such malignancy. As with colon cancer, screening identifies
many cases before they cause any physical signs or symptoms and, by identifying the disease early on, has resulted in significant improvements in mortality
due to this disease. Nevertheless, routine mammography can miss a substantial
minority of palpable breast cancers (up to 15%) due to the radiographic characteristics of the tumor and surrounding breast tissue, and another 30% of breast
cancer is diagnosed between scheduled mammographic exams. Furthermore,
screening mammography can reveal abnormalities that on subsequent biopsy
prove to be benign; these false positives result in unnecessary anxiety on the
part of the patient, medical expense, and, rarely, procedural complications. In
addition, the effectiveness of screening, whether with regular mammography or
other imaging modalities and, in certain cases, combined with patient self‐
examinations, is dictated to a significant degree by the likelihood of the individual patient developing a breast cancer; this likelihood is influenced by patient
age, gynecologic history, and other factors. Guidelines for screening are consequently highly controversial, though as a rule patients should be counseled on
the risks and benefits of screening based on their personal risk of developing
breast cancer, which is calculated according to published models such as the
Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool [4].
In those instances in which breast cancer is not identified by screening, the
presenting symptom is typically a firm, immobile mass within the breast tissue;
associated skin changes in the area of the tumor can include dimpling and inflammation, and the nipple can appear pulled in, or inverted, and/or discharge clear
or bloody fluid. Breast cancer that metastasizes often does so first to the lymph
nodes in the armpit which is the first stop in the lymph drainage of the breast tissue. Therefore a mass in the armpit may accompany a newly diagnosed breast
tumor and, indeed, be the initial finding in patients in whom the primary tumor
is deep in the breast or relatively small. Beyond the lymph nodes in the armpit,
breast cancer is prone to subsequently spread to the bones, which can cause pain
or even fracture, and the liver and lungs. Cancer metastases in the bones, regardless of their original site, can cause sufficient breakdown of the skeleton to cause
hypercalcemia, an increase in the level of calcium in the bloodstream.
Hypercalcemia itself can cause a variety of signs symptoms, such as profound
fatigue, constipation, nausea, and kidney damage. In addition to treating the
underlying cancer, the treatment of hypercalcemia requires measures aimed at
flushing the mineral out of the bloodstream and into the urine and inhibiting the
turnover of calcium within bones.
As with any metastatic disease, the dysregulation of a breast cancer cell’s suicide pathways and homing mechanisms render it capable of seeding and growing
in any distant organ, resulting in potentially myriad signs and symptoms.

Organ‐specific Sign s and Symptom s

85

Prostate Cancer
The prostate gland is the organ found in males positioned between the urinary
bladder and rectum that secretes fluids into the ejaculate supporting the survival
and motility of sperm. Cancer of the prostate is an extremely common malignancy, and is estimated to affect approximately one in six men; the rate of mortality from prostate cancer is approximately 1 in in 34 men. Prostate specific
antigen (PSA), is a protein secreted by and unique to prostate cells. The PSA
level in the bloodstream is easily measured, and can be elevated due to prostate
cancer or other processes such as benign prostatic hypertrophy or an infectious
prostatitis. For many of the reasons outlined above regarding the specifics of
breast cancer screening, routine prostate cancer screening by PSA measurement
is controversial. Moreover, while some prostate cancers are potentially lethal and
require comprehensive treatment, others are slow‐growing and pose no danger
over the lifetime of the patient, particularly since they often appear in a man’s
older age; indeed, autopsy series have shown that 80% of men who die in their
70s or later have prostate cancer. Diagnosing these cancers that through a natural
course would cause no ill‐effects during a patient’s lifetime is termed overdiagnosis. Since the relatively indolent course of such prostate cancers cannot be
reliably predicted at the time of the diagnosis, however, the diagnosis of prostate
cancer, which itself can result in complications stemming from the biopsy of the
gland, leads to treatments with inherent potential side effects including urinary
incontinence, sexual dysfunction, and bowel symptoms. The role of PSA screening, therefore, is complex and requires in‐depth discussion between a patient and
his doctor.
More than three out of four diagnoses of prostate cancer are made due to
evaluation of an abnormal PSA test; a subset of these abnormal PSA values
were checked to investigate an abnormality detected on digital rectal examination, a technique in which a clinician palpates the surface of the prostate gland
using a finger inserted into the rectum. Men with early prostate cancer limited
to the gland itself are generally without symptoms. An abnormal flow of urine,
including hesitancy and frequency, results from enlargement of the prostate
which can be due to cancer or, more often, benign prostatic hypertrophy. Blood
in the urine or sperm are more ominous symptoms that necessitate an evaluation for cancer. Prostate cancer is notorious for spreading to the bones as a first
site of metastasis, and pain and neurological deficits are common complications of this.
Head and Neck Cancer
The anatomy of the head and neck is intricate, and involves anatomic structures
that are critical for many different bodily functions. The first signs and symptoms
of cancer in this region of the body therefore encompass a wide spectrum. Pain

86

Early Warning Sign s

localizing to the site of the primary tumor is a common complaint, but pain may be
referred as well. Generally, tumors of the tongue, lip, floor of the mouth, and ­buccal
mucosa are identified earlier in their course than those involving deeper structures
in the throat, such as the hypopharynx and tonsils, which are relatively less well
enervated. Otalgia, or pain experienced in the ear, can be referred from disruption
of various cranial and cervical nerves that supply the sinuses and oral cavity down
through the larynx. Lesions in the oral cavity, masses in the neck, dysphagia,
odynophagia, abnormalities of speech, and bleeding are routinely observed in
patients with cancers affecting the oral cavity and pharynx. Hoarseness, cough,
and difficulty breathing accompany tumors of the larynx. Since tobacco or alcohol
use are the chief risk factors for the development of head and neck cancer, patients
with such a history should be mindful to report new symptoms and receive regular
medical and dental follow‐up.
Genitourinary Cancers
Historically, ovarian cancer was labeled a “silent killer” because of the impression that signs and symptoms did not appear until the most advanced stages.
More recent studies have shown, however, that symptoms of bloating, pain in
the abdomen or pelvis, early satiety, and urinary symptoms manifest even in the
early stages of ovarian cancer and that evaluation for this possibility be considered in the appropriate circumstances. A mass in the adnexa of the uterus found
during routine physical examination or imaging of the pelvis performed for a
separate reason may be the initial sign of ovarian cancer in asymptomatic
women. A Sister Mary Joseph Nodule describes a mass in the navel that represents metastatic cancer. While nonspecific for a site of origin, cancers of the
ovary, in addition to organs of the gastrointestinal tract, are most typically
implicated. Postmenopausal bleeding, while observed infrequently as a result of
ovarian cancer, is more indicative of abnormalities, including cancer, of the
uterus or cervix.
Though rare, testicular cancer is the most common solid tumor in young men;
additionally, testicular cancer is highly treatable, with cure rates exceeding
95%. As a result, the successful treatment of testicular cancer can result in decades of essentially normal life for an individual who otherwise would have succumbed to disease at an early age. For this reason, it is critical that a diagnosis
of testicular cancer is not missed. A painless mass or unilateral enlargement of
the testicle is the most common presentation; pain or discomfort in the lower
abdominal or scrotal regions can nevertheless occur. Such symptoms require
prompt medical attention and urological evaluation. Since testicular tumors can
secrete functional hormones, gynecomastia, or enlargement of the breast, and
symptoms of hyperthyroidism may result. Testicular cancer metastasizes most
often to the lymph nodes in the pelvis and abdomen, the lungs, and the bones;

Summary

87

metastatic disease is found in about one in ten patients newly diagnosed with
testicular cancer.
Cancers of the kidney are associated with a “classic triad” of symptoms,
including flank pain, blood in the urine, and a mass in the abdomen. Despite
the nomenclature, all three symptoms are found in less than 10% of patients
with kidney cancer. Increasingly, as CT and ultrasound scans are being performed for other indications, kidney cancers are diagnosed incidentally, that is,
as a chance finding during evaluation of a separate issue. Kidney cancers are
relatively commonly implicated in paraneoplastic syndromes, the phenomenon
in which a cancer secretes a hormone or protein into the bloodstream that
causes effects seemingly unrelated to the site of the tumor. Kidney cancers can,
for example secrete the hormone erythropoietin, resulting in increased red
blood cells, renin, causing hypertension, and insulin, causing hypoglycemia.
Treatment of paraneoplastic syndromes fundamentally requires effective treatment of the tumor itself.
Melanoma
Melanoma, a potentially fatal cancer of the skin, epitomizes the value of recognizing and attending to the early warning signs and symptoms in cancer. Melanomas
are curable when found early enough and removed surgically. Differentiating benign
nevi, or moles, from potentially malignant melanoma requires the expertise of a
dermatologist and, for any questionable lesion, pathologic examination of a biopsy.
Yet, there are several features of pigmented skin lesions that can be reliably observed
by the lay public and warrant medical attention: these include a change in size,
color, or shape of the lesion, and any associated inflammation, bleeding, crusting,
change in sensation, and size exceeding 6 mm. Similar to the theme described above
in many types of malignancy, familiarity with what constitutes concerning signs and
symptoms of disease combined with an awareness of unexpected physical changes
are important for the earliest possible detection of cancer.

Summary
The signs and symptoms of cancer are many and diverse. They overlap with diseases of other etiologies, particularly infectious and autoimmune, and they cover a
range of intensities. The majority of cancers give no signs or symptoms, at least in
the early stages. Timely diagnosis of cancer requires vigilance of the individual
and the healthcare team. The recognition of abnormal signs and symptoms and an
appropriate, measured pursuit of an underlying diagnosis yields the best chance of
finding a cancer early and successfully managing it.

88

Early Warning Sign s

References
1. Cannistra, S.A. and Niloff, J.M. (1996). Cancer of the uterine cervix. New England Journal of
Medicine 334 (16): 1030–1037.
2. Timp, J.F., Braekkan, S.K., Versteeg, H.H. et al. (2013). Epidemiology of cancer‐associated
venous thrombosis. Blood 122 (10): 1712–1723.
3. Aberle, D.R., Adams, A.M., Berg, C.D. et al. (2011). Reduced lung‐cancer mortality with low‐
dose computed tomographic screening. New England Journal of Medicine 365 (5): 395–409.
4. http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool

5
Importance of Imaging
for Diagnosis and
Treatment of Cancer
Kristin DeStigter, Sally Herschorn, Anant Bhave,
Benjamin Lange, and Sean Reynolds
Larner College of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA

Radiological imaging tests are an important part of the process of cancer ­diagnosis
and treatment. Radiologic imaging encompasses techniques that use X‐rays, sound
waves (ultrasound), magnetic fields, and radioactive particles to look inside the body
(Table 1). These tests in the context of good clinical information can play an impor­
tant role in all stages of detection and treatment. Imaging can be used to find cancer
in its earliest stages before there are any signs or symptoms. This type of a “screen­
ing” exam is exemplified by screening mammography, a familiar test routinely per­
formed to detect early breast cancer. Recently lung cancer screening Computed
Tomography (CT) has gained favor to detect early disease in high‐risk patients.
Radiology tests can also be used to search for suspected cancer when signs and
symptoms are suspicious. Cross‐sectional imaging tests like CT and Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI), sometimes combined with Positron Emission
Tomography (PET), can be useful in both localizing a tumor and to help classify
stage disease spread. In addition, these techniques can assist with biopsy planning as
well as subsequent treatment planning tailored to provide the best optimal outcome.
For example CT or MRI can show if a pancreatic cancer has invaded important blood
vessels or other organs and this will direct subsequent management. Baseline radio­
logical imaging studies help to follow response to therapy and look for recurrence.

Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

89

T A B L E 1. Comparison of radiological modalities commonly used for imaging cancer.

Modality

Radiography

Ultrasound (US)

Computed
Tomography
(CT)

Magnetic
Positron Emission
Resonance
Tomography
Imaging (MRI)
(PET)

SPECT

How
Images are
Produced

Injection of gamma‐ray
Injection of
High frequency Scans through Magnetic field
X‐rays
or X‐ray emitting
positron
(no ionizing
the body
sound (no
(ionizing
radiotracer (ionizing
emitting
radiation)
using X‐rays
ionizing
radiation)
radiation). Computer
radiotracer
used to
with computer
radiation)
passed
processing of data on
(ionizing
evaluate
processing to
with computer
through the
radiotracer location
radiation).
differences in
construct
generating
body with
generates cross‐
Computer
the hydrogen
cross‐
differences in cross‐sectional
sectional images.
processing of
content of
sectional
images based
attenuation
data on
the tissues.
images
on time of
of X‐ray
radiotracer
Computer
sound return
beam
location
processing
to the machine
producing
generates
produces
combined with
the images
cross‐sectional
cross‐
attenuation of
images.
sectional
sound waves
images.

Advantages

Fast
Portable
High‐Spatial
Resolution

Fast
Portable
Enables
dynamic
(Real‐Time)
evaluation

Mammography/
Tomosynthesis
X‐rays (ionizing
radiation) as with
radiography
passed through the
breast with
differences in
X‐ray attenuation
producing images.
Optimized for high
spatial resolution
and high soft‐
tissue contrast.
Tomosynthesis
adds computer
postprocessing to
produce partially
cross‐sectional
images.

Fast
Fast (especially Outstanding soft Allows evaluation Cross‐sectional
evaluation of gamma Excellent soft tissue
of physiologic
tissue contrast
with helical
contrast
emitting radiotracer
processes
acquisition) Some sequences
localization – improves High spatial
enable direct More sensitive
Excellent soft
resolution – aids
sensitivity and
than CT or MR
diagnoses
tissue contrast
in detecting and
specificity over planar
for metastatic
(e.g., DWI for
Limited
characterizing
images
disease in the
stroke)
dynamic
calcifications
proper setting
Inherently
evaluation
Higher resolution
multiplanar
than SPECT
Inherently
cross‐sectional

90

0004257450.INDD 90

5/10/2019 4:39:12 PM

Disadvantages Poor soft tissue Highly operator High radiation
doses,
contrast
dependent
particularly
Low soft tissue
for dynamic
contrast
evaluation
(compared to
Not portable
CT/MR)

Applications
Relative cost

Cheap

Cheap

Expensive

Slow
Interior of
scanner
uncomfortable
for some
patients
Requires
extensive
shielding
Not portable

Nonspecific – exams
Slow
Slow
often require
Low resolution
Low spatial
follow‐up ultrasound
Relatively high radiation
resolution
and/or biopsy
exposure
relative to other
Compression
modalities
uncomfortable
Patient must hold
for patients
position for a
long period of
time
Relatively high
radiation
exposure

Most Expensive Most Expensive

Expensive

Cheap

91

0004257450.INDD 91

5/10/2019 4:39:12 PM

92

Importance of Imaging for D iagnosi s and Treatment of C ancer

Interventional Radiology
Procedures performed by interventional radiologists are becoming increasingly
important in the management of patients with cancer (Table 2). Interventional
radiology procedures are now widely used as the best minimally invasive option
to obtain biopsy samples from solid tumors for cytology and pathology testing.
Image‐guided procedures are also useful to sample fluid collections that may
­contain tumor cells. Transcatheter embolization is an interventional radiology
procedure that delivers cancer‐treating agents (including chemotherapy and radia­
tion therapy) directly through the blood vessels supplying the tumor. Interventional
therapies also include tumor ablation, procedures that kill cancer cells directly
using a variety of techniques including heating, freezing, and electrical ­stimulation.
Image‐guidance is useful to gain access to veins to insert catheters that deliver
treatment to cancer patients. Some of these catheters may also be used instead of
a traditional IV during CT and MR scans performed for cancer monitoring. Lastly,
complications from cancer, like infection and bleeding, can be treated with inter­
ventional techniques. Compared to traditional surgery, interventional radiology
techniques can often be performed at lower cost with fewer side effects, often as
outpatient procedures.
Imaging Screening, Diagnosis and Staging, and Follow‐Up
Before approaching the topic of the integration of imaging into modern oncologic
care, a few definitions and a discussion on the distinct imaging modalities utilized
in providing care to cancer patients is necessary. All the imaging modalities ­utilized
in the modern practice of radiology have been used at some point for cancer care.
The modern paradigm of cancer care consists of four distinct settings in which
imaging tests play a role: large‐scale screening of populations without known
­disease, cancer diagnosis, cancer staging, and follow‐up to evaluate for treatment
efficacy and cancer recurrence.
Large‐scale mammographic screening of the female population has been per­
formed for many years. As noted above, with the publication of the National Lung
Cancer Screening Trial in 2011, many centers have begun programs using low‐
dose CT to screen for Lung Cancer in smokers who meet specific criteria.
Breast Cancer Screening, Diagnosis and Staging
Breast cancer is a useful model for understanding the more general integration of
imaging into the diagnosis and treatment of oncologic disease. Breast cancer has a
well‐established imaging‐based screening regime. The success of breast cancer

93

Breast C ancer Screening, D iagnosis and Stag i ng

T a b l e 2. Commonly performed interventional radiology procedures.
IR Procedures

Description

–– A wide variety of tumors may be
sampled with small needles
under radiology guidance
–– Abnormal fluid collections
within the body may be drained
to help diagnose cancers or to
improve cancer symptoms
Venous Access –– Temporary or semi‐permanent
catheters can be placed in veins
using minimally invasive
techniques
–– Uses include chemotherapy,
antibiotics, nutrition, and IV
contrast for CT or MR scans
Dialysis Access –– Temporary or semi‐permanent
dialysis catheters can be placed
in veins or the abdomen
(peritoneal space) for patients
with kidney failure due to cancer
Tumor Ablation –– Many cancers may be treated
using needles placed directly
into the tumor
–– Tumor cells are killed using a
variety of techniques including
heating, freezing, and electrical
stimulation
Biopsy and
Drainage

Imaging
Guidance

Examples

–– Sample tumors and
–– X‐ray
lymph nodes throughout
–– Ultrasound
the body
–– CT
–– Drain fluid collections
–– MRI
throughout the body

–– X‐ray
Access devices include:
–– Ultrasound –– PICC lines
–– Groshong or Hickman
catheters
–– Chest ports

–– X‐ray
Access devices include:
–– Ultrasound –– Tunneled venous
dialysis catheters
–– Peritoneal dialysis
catheters
Types of Ablation:
–– X‐ray
–– Ultrasound –– Radiofrequency
–– Cryoablation
–– CT
–– Microwave
–– MRI
–– Electroporation
Frequently treated
cancers:
–– Lung cancer
–– Liver cancer
–– Kidney cancer
–– X‐ray
Frequently treated
Transcatheter
–– Some cancers may be treated
cancers:
using catheters to deliver potent
Embolization
–– Liver cancer
medications directly into the
–– Metastatic colon cancer
tumor
–– Cholangiocarcinoma
–– Tiny particles containing
(bile duct cancer)
chemotherapy or radiation
–– Metastatic
therapy are administered directly
neuroendocrine cancer
into the tumor through feeding
blood vessels

screening has resulted in the majority of breast cancers being discovered during
screening. Screening allows early detection of breast cancer, which improves
­survival and often allows less invasive and less costly treatment. There are many
studies on the efficacy of screening and they have been interpreted in different
ways in the literature and media, leading to controversy. The potential benefits of

94

Importance of Imaging for D iagnosi s and Treatment of C ancer

screening (lower chances of dying from breast cancer if diagnosed) must be
weighed against the potential harms (call backs for additional imaging when there
is no cancer, biopsies of benign findings, and treatment of cancers that would not
have been responsible for the patient’s death if left untreated).
Screening is not intended to determine whether or not cancer is present. Rather
screening aims to separate patients without cancer from those who might potentially have cancer (these women get called back for additional evaluation). The
greatest mortality benefit to the overall population is gained from annual screen­
ing mammography for all women ages 40 and up. However, some women (those
with genetic mutations such as BRCA, prior radiation treatment to the chest in
their teens and 20s, or a strong family history of breast cancer) are at increased
risk for developing breast cancer. This is defined as a greater than 20% lifetime
risk of breast cancer. For comparison, the average lifetime risk of breast cancer
in women in the general population is 13%. In this select population, high‐risk
screening regimens are used (more information can be found at http://www.
cancer.org/cancer/breastcancer/moreinformation/breastcancerearlydetection/
breast‐cancer‐early‐detection‐acs‐recs).
Mammographic screening is conducted with two standard mammographic
views, a top to bottom image (craniocaudal [CC]) and an oblique image angled
along the chest wall (mediolateral oblique [MLO]) of each breast (Figure 1a
shows these two views). 3D mammography, also called tomosynthesis, is an
­augmentation of the standard two‐view mammogram also now available for both
screening and diagnosis. 3D mammography has been shown to reduce the
­number of patients called back when there is actually no cancer as well as
improving cancer detection, especially for women with dense breasts. This is
important because mammography is less sensitive for detecting breast cancer in
women with dense breasts (approximately 40–50% of the population) and
because women with dense breasts are at slightly increased risk of developing
breast ­cancer. These women may choose to have supplementary screening in
addition to mammography with ultrasound or MRI. MRI is typically reserved for
those at very high risk (over 20% lifetime risk) while ultrasound is usually used
for those at moderate risk (15–20%).
Diagnostic breast imaging is used for women (and sometimes men) with symp­
toms (lump, pain, nipple discharge) or women whose screening mammogram
showed an abnormality. In the diagnostic setting, the focus is on the problem that
caused the patient to come for imaging. The goal is to determine whether or not a
given patient has or does not have cancer. Ultrasound is an essential part of breast
diagnosis. Not all cancers are detectable on mammography, therefore, women
with lumps must be evaluated with ultrasound to make sure that an abnormality
causing the lump is detected (Figure 1b shows an example of the ultrasound
appearance of breast cancer). If there is an abnormality, ultrasound is helpful to
determine whether a finding is suspicious for cancer or is a definitely benign
­finding, such as a cyst. Sometimes, a biopsy is needed to establish whether or
not cancer is present. Breast imagers perform needle biopsies using ultrasound,

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Breast Cancer, screening diagnosis and staging. (a) Top to bottom (craniocaudal [CC])
(left) and midline to lateral (mediolateral oblique [MLO]) (right) images of the right breast
obtained in a patient with a palpable lump shown by the triangular palpable lump marker. The
magnified images centered on the palpable lump marker show a spiculated mass in the upper
inner portion of the breast. (b) As part of the workup of the mass seen on the mammogram ultrasound was performed. The mass is seen centered on the ultrasound images. It is decreased in
ultrasound attenuation as compared to the surrounding fat and breast tissue. The tiny bright dots
within the mass are concerning for micro‐calcifications, raising the risk that this is a malignant
mass. (c) Breast MRI obtained to evaluate the extent of the mass. The mass is seen on the left as
the bright region, very different in its appearance from the remaining glandular tissue of the
breast. (d) Images from a so‐called specimen mammogram obtained after a breast surgeon
removed the mass seen on (a)–(c). These are obtained at higher dose than the normal images, as
dose is no longer a concern. The magnified imaged below centered on the surgical clip shows to
better advantage the micro‐calcifications also seen at ultrasound. This cancer proved to be an
invasive ductal carcinoma, the most common type of breast cancer.

95

96

Importance of Imaging for D iagnosi s and Treatment of C ancer

mammography, or MRI for guidance. This ensures that the biopsied lesion was
truly the abnormality detected at imaging. These procedures are done using local
anesthetic and are typically well tolerated with minimal pain. Approximately 70%
of biopsies are benign (no cancer is present). When a cancer is diagnosed, the
patient can be referred for treatment to a surgeon (Figure 1d shows a mammogram
of a breast mass after it was removed by a breast surgeon). Sometimes additional
testing is also necessary. MRI can sometimes be helpful in assessing the size of a
cancer, how much of the breast contains cancer cells, and whether or not there
are additional sites in the same breast or opposite breast (Figure 1c). This infor­
mation may be helpful to the surgeon in planning the approach to a given cancer.
Breast imaging radiologists work very closely with surgeons, medical ­oncologists,
and radiation oncologists to review each patient’s individual case and come to a
consensus on optimum treatment. The recurrence rate for breast cancer after treat­
ment is low however, patients usually visit the breast imaging department ­annually
for surveillance to make sure that if a recurrence develops it is caught and
treated early.

Diagnosis, Staging, and Follow‐Up
The process of oncologic imaging in most cancer patients is similar to that described
for breast cancer. The crucial difference is that, for the majority of cancers, screen­
ing is not used for diagnosis. In the absence of a defined screening regime, the
process of diagnosing cancer and staging it is not as clearly defined as it is in the
case of breast cancer. Most cancer patients present for initial imaging in a scenario
similar to that described above in the Diagnostic setting. However, the focus is not
necessarily on answering a question as clear‐cut as “is there cancer here or not?”
The vast majority of patients who present for Diagnostic Mammography either
have a symptom of breast cancer (such a lump or nipple discharge) or have had an
abnormality on their screening mammogram that might potentially be cancer. This
is not true of patients who present for Diagnostic Imaging as a whole. Imaging
plays a large and vital role in all facets of modern medical care, which changes the
scope of the clinical question to be answered. Patients who will ultimately be diag­
nosed with a cancer therefore have two common presentations. The first group
presents to a physician with symptoms suspicious for cancer. The physician will
then order an imaging test to confirm his or her suspicion that cancer is present.
Such presentations are analogous to the diagnostic setting of breast cancer imag­
ing – cancer is suspected and imaging is used to confirm this diagnosis.
However, this is not the only, or even necessarily the most common, way in
which imaging plays a role in diagnosis of cancer. The other common presentation
involves people imaged for symptoms that are either nonspecific or unrelated to
cancer. The clinician ordering the test has no reason to suspect a cancer. Not all
cancers produce symptoms. Indeed, cancers capable of producing symptoms are

Di agnosi s, S tag ing, an d Follow‐Up

97

Figure 2. Axial and Coronal CT images of the left kidney show a 1 cm mass. It is predominantly
fluid however, a small enhancing nodule is seen in the wall. This appearance is concerning for
a cystic renal cell carcinoma, which this lesion proved to be at the time of ablation.

generally relatively advanced – they have been in the body for a long time before
they actually cause symptoms. Imaging is quite good at detecting these unsus­
pected cancers. A small enhancing renal mass seen during a CT for appendicitis is
a good example of such a cancer (Figure 2).
The detection of a cancer, whether suspected or not prior to imaging, is the
first of many tasks that a radiologist faces when interpreting an imaging study.
The second step is to provide information to the clinician that will be helpful
in treatment. This can be thought of as determining how much cancer is present
and where in the body that cancer is seen. Ultimately, this information is used
for a process called staging. Staging is a method for subcategorizing patients
into groups with similar amounts and/or types of disease. It is typically spe­
cific to the type of cancer encountered, for example, lymphoma is staged dif­
ferently to breast cancer. By devising specific treatments for groups with
similar disease, it is possible to improve overall outcomes and tailor care to a
particular patient. The distinction between staging and diagnosis is important
both for radiologists interpreting images and for oncologists and surgeons who
use the information provided to treat patients. Imaging tests have specific
strengths and weaknesses. In particular, some tests are very good for making
diagnoses while others are very good at staging. The choice of what test to use
varies not only by the setting, that is, diagnostic versus staging, but also based
on the type of cancer being imaged.
Finally, once a patient has been diagnosed and staged he or she will begin
treatment. Imaging is used on patients undergoing treatment to determine
whether or not the treatment is effective. This process is normally termed
­follow‐up. It is similar to staging in that the amount and extent of disease is
being evaluated. The duration of this follow‐up period varies based on the type
of cancer, the extent of disease, the treatment administered, and even the discre­
tion of the physician or physicians treating a given patient. As with breast can­
cer, most cancer patients are imaged at set intervals for a while after treatment

98

Importance of Imaging for D iagnosi s and Treatment of C ancer

has been completed to determine whether or not the cancer has returned in order
to allow prompt treatment of such a recurrence.
An easy way to think of all diagnostic tests, imaging included, is that they are
ways of discriminating between normal and abnormal (disease) states. Imaging
tests accomplish this in a variety of ways. X‐rays, CT, and mammography all
depend on the differential attenuation of ionizing radiation (essentially high
energy light) by the tissues of the body. Ultrasound operates on the same p­ rinciple,
but with high‐frequency sound waves rather than high‐energy light. MRI works
by evaluating the differences in the concentration and milieu of hydrogen atoms
within a volume. Ultimately, these exams are all methods of noninvasively pro­
ducing images of the anatomy. They are therefore reliant on changes in patient
anatomy for diagnosis. This is very useful for oncologic imaging because the
sensitivity of these tests for even small cancers is high. Most cancers present as
masses and therefore distort the anatomy in ways easily detected at imaging.
This is not necessarily true in staging a tumor. It is very important to detect even
tiny metastases because they change the imaging assessment of the amount and extent
of disease in a given patient. This in turn changes the patient’s stage and therefore the
patient’s treatment. If one defines a metastasis as a group of cells related to the original
cancer but outside of the original mass, one begins to see the problem. A small group
of cells that should not be in a particular location is difficult to detect. For example,
it takes a large number of cancer cells to enlarge a lymph node until it becomes
clearly abnormal by Ultrasound, CT, or MRI. The presence or absence of lymph
node metastases is very important for staging in the most commonly used staging
scheme (the Tumor, Node, Metastases [TNM] system). It is in this setting that the
“other” frequently used imaging modality, nuclear medicine, is most useful.
Oncologic Applications of Nuclear Medicine
Nuclear medicine imaging tests are widely used in oncologic imaging, primarily
for the staging of disease. They are useful because they provide information not
obtainable from anatomic imaging. Anatomic imaging is the primary mode in
which medical imaging is used, as described previously. However, the effect of
cancer cells on the local anatomy is not the only thing differentiating cancer cells
from normal cells. Cancer cells, after all, are very different from normal cells in
physiologic terms. Their DNA is similar to the cells they arise from but it isn’t the
same. They typically have a suite of mutations allowing them to escape the physi­
ologic constraints placed on normal cells. They often have mutations disabling the
upper limit on cell divisions and bypassing the normal checkpoints for DNA repli­
cation for example. In essence, the suite of mutations present in a cancer cells
make them different from normal cells, particularly in their physiology, specifi­
cally in the ways in which they acquire and use energy. Nuclear medicine exams
used for the purposes of oncologic imaging exploit this aberrant physiology to
render even anatomically insignificant numbers of cancer cells visible.

Onco l og ic App licati ons of Nuclear Me di c ine

99

The fundamental difference between nuclear medicine exams and other imag­
ing exams is that the patient is the source of the energy used to generate the image.
In X‐ray, CT, MRI, and ultrasound, a source external to the patient produces the
energy that will ultimately be used to form the image. The patient is exposed to
energy that can pass through the patient and then is used to form an image of the
inside of the patient. In nuclear medicine, the patient is given one of a vast array of
so‐called radiopharmaceuticals or radiotracers. These tracers are labeled with radi­
oactive compounds. When they undergo radioactive decay, they emit gamma or
X‐ray radiation. For context, the most commonly used radionuclide in nuclear
medicine, Technetium 99 m, produces gamma rays with about twice the energy of
the average energy of the X‐ray source used in CT. Different nuclides produce
radiation with different energies.
Nuclides are chemically active and therefore may play a role in the various
chemical reactions that occur within the body to make life possible. This
makes nuclides very useful in that their distribution can be representative of a
patient’s underlying physiology. Some nuclides are used in their elemental form
(Gallium‐67 or Iodine‐123 for example) while others are used to label an array
of compounds that follow a specific distribution in the body. The combination of
the two (a radionuclide and its distribution altering compound) is known as a
radiopharmaceutical. For example, the aforementioned 99Tc can be complexed
with methyl diphosphate (MDP) to produce the commonly used bone localizing
radiopharmaceutical 99Tc‐MDP. This compound is incorporated into the matrix
that forms the bones and therefore can show areas where the bone is more active
such as fractures or points where it is actively remodeling as it does around a
metastasis (Figure 3a and b).
There are limitations to this approach. The biggest is that amount of radia­
tion available to create the image is much smaller than that available with X‐ray
or CT. This is because the “source” (the radiotracer) is inside the patient. This
means that the patient will be exposed to ionizing radiation from the radionu­
clide until it has completely decayed and/or been excreted. Image quality (both
spatial resolution and contrast) improves as the amount of radiation used to
­produce the image increases. In practice, this means that acquisition of nuclear
medicine images takes a longer time and requires patients to remain still in
order to obtain sufficient diagnostic quality. Because only a small amount of
energy is used to produce a given image, the spatial resolution and the anatomic
information of the image are both poor. Despite this, because many of the pro­
cesses evaluated with nuclear medicine are physiologically very different in the
cancer cell as compared to a normal cell, the images carry information not
obtainable with anatomical imaging such as CT. Hybrid techniques allowing
fusion of functional processes detected with nuclear medicine and anatomical
information from CT have been found to be even more beneficial than either
technique alone.
The most commonly used radiopharmaceutical in oncologic imaging is
2‐deoxy‐2‐(18F)fluoro‐d‐glucose, normally abbreviated as 18F‐FDG or simply as

100

Importance of Imag ing for Diagnosi s and Treatment of Cancer

(a)

(b)

RT ANTERIOR LT

Figure 3. (a) Two views of the right shoulder as well as an image from 99mTc‐MDP bone scan show
a fracture of the surgical neck of the humerus. Increased MDP uptake is seen at the same point on
the bone scan due to increased remodeling of the bone. (b) Anterior projection from a 99mTc‐MDP
whole body bone scan as well as axial and coronal images from a CT obtained within one week of
the bone scan show increased radiopharmaceutical uptake at the left puboacetabular junction
corresponding to a lytic metastasis seen on CT. There are additional metastases present in the
spine and proximal left femoral metadiaphysis.

Onco l og ic App licati ons of Nuclear Me di c ine

101

FDG. The radionuclide is Fluorine‐18. It works slightly differently to most nuclides
in that, though it is radioactive, it does not emit light directly when it decays.
Instead, it produces a positron (the antimatter electron and the “P” in PET scan).
When this particle encounters an electron both particles are annihilated, again pro­
ducing light of ionizing intensity (ionizing radiation). Rather than a single beam
(as with gamma rays), two beams are produced traveling at 180° from each other.
These beams are used to localize the annihilation event and therefore the location
where the Flurorine‐18 atom was when it emitted the positron.
FDG is a glucose‐analogue. All cells in the body absorb this analogue just as
they absorb glucose but they cannot actually break the analogue down to produce
energy (it lacks the 2′ hydroxyl group necessary to complete glycolysis). Therefore
it shows areas of the body where there is high demand for glucose. Cancer cells,
particularly aggressive cancer cells, often have a very high demand for energy with
a correspondingly high demand for substances that can be used to produce energy
such as glucose. The demand for the glucose further increases when the tumor cells
switch to nonoxidative metabolism. This metabolism requires around 20 times
more glucose molecules to produce same amount of energy. This effect described
by Warburg, in turn, means that on FDG PET scans they have a disproportionate
demand for FDG – they are “FDG avid (Figure 4).”

Figure 4. Pre‐ and posttreatment MIP images from an 18F‐FDG PET scan in a patient with Hodgkin
lymphoma. There is abnormal uptake seen throughout the chest. This resolves on the posttreatment study with the normal, physiologic distribution of the radiopharmaceutical shown.

102

Importance of Imag ing for Diagnosi s and Treatment of Cancer

From the standpoint of oncologic imaging this technique is very useful
because it can indicate the presence of cancer cells even in anatomically nor­
mal tissues (Figure 5). This makes FDG PET more sensitive for metastatic
­disease than anatomic scans and in turn allows more accurate and much less
invasive staging.
FDG has become the workhorse molecule for staging the majority of can­
cers because it can show a physiologic change common to the majority of
­cancers, regardless of the underlying subtype or the organ of origin. There are
a number of other radiopharmaceuticals that are also used in oncologic ­practice.
These radiopharmaceuticals depend on the clonal nature of cancers – they
­normally are very similar genetically, arising from either a single deranged cell
or a very small group of cells. As a result, the other cells in the clone often have
similar genetic profiles to the progenitor cells. These radiopharmaceuticals

Figure 5.

18
F‐FDG PET as well as coronal images from the accompanying attenuation correction
CT shows a normal CT appearance of the bones. However, bone marrow uptake is diffusely
increased in this patient with non‐Hodgkin lymphoma. This finding is diagnostic of bone marrow
involvement, which modifies the patient’s staging. Also note splenomegaly and nodal involvement both below and above the diaphragm.

Onco l og ic App licati ons of Nuclear Me di c ine

103

tend to be useful only for certain specific types of tumor because the cell must
have the ability to take them in order for the radiopharmaceuticals to be useful
for imaging.
The most commonly used of these radiopharmaceuticals are: radioiodine (2 dif­
ferent commonly used radionuclides Iodine‐123 and Iodine‐131), Indium‐111
Pentetreotide, Iodine‐123 or ‐131 Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG), and various
radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies.
Radioiodine is of great use in the staging and treatment of thyroid neoplasms.
It comes in two variants. Iodine‐123 (I‐123) is the variant more commonly used for
imaging for a number of reasons. Ionizing radiation produced from its decay is less
intense than that produced by Iodine‐131 (I‐131). Also, its shorter half‐life allows
relatively more of the radiopharmaceutical to be administered, which produces
better images. Finally, it does not emit charged particles as well as light (as I‐131
does) which means that the dose (the cumulative sum of all radiation) a patient
receives from I‐123 is substantially smaller than the dose from I‐131 which under­
goes the same number of decays. The latter property of I‐131 (emission of charged
particles which results in a high‐radiation dose) can be useful in the proper context.
In modern practice, it is used for the treatment of thyroid cancer. Once the thyroid
has been excised surgically, I‐131 can be used to administer a dose of radiation
to the residual thyroid sufficiently high to destroy residual thyroid tissue and also
micrometastases if present (Figure 6).

Figure 6. Normal planar images from I‐123 (left) and I‐131 (right) scans. Uptake in the neck
relates to residual thyroid tissue – the patient was status post thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer.
The I‐131 will ablate this tissue. Note the uptake seen in the liver on the I‐131 study not seen on
the I‐123 study. This is physiologic, it occurs due the metabolization of I‐131 containing thyroid
hormone by the liver. The posttreatment study is generally obtained one week after the administration of I‐131.

Figure 7. MIP from SPECT and planar images from a normal Indium‐111 Pentreotide (Octreoscan).
This is the normal uptake of this radiopharmaceutical. Notice the low uptake in the lungs, pancreatic fossa, liver, abdomen, and pelvis. This is helpful as these are the areas in which the neuroendocrine tumors, which this radiopharmaceutical is used for imaging, are most frequently seen.

Figure 8. MIP and whole body planar Images from an I‐123 MIBG scan show the normal distribution of this radiopharmaceutical. This study, as is the case for most MIBG studies, was performed
to evaluate for neuroblastoma.

Onco l og ic App licati ons of Nuclear Me di c ine

105

Indium‐111 Pentetreotide is an analog of somatostatin, a naturally occurring
neuropeptide that is synthesized and released by some cells in the nervous system
and the endocrine system. Some neuroendocrine tumors express receptors for
somatostatin in large numbers. This makes Pentetreotide very useful both for diag­
nosis of primary tumors too small to be easily detected on CT or MR as well as for
staging of these tumors. Tumors where this radiopharmaceutical can be useful
include neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma, carcinoid tumor, pituitary adenoma,
medullary thyroid cancer, pancreatic islet cell tumor, paragangliomas, and small
cell lung cancers (Figure 7)
Iodine‐123 or Iodine‐131 MIBG is an analog of guanethidine, similar to nor­
epinephrine. It is therefore taken up by the cells of the adrenal medulla and by
tumors derived from these cells, specifically neuroblastomas and pheochromo­
cytomas. For these tumor subtypes it is slightly more sensitive and specific than
Pentetreotide, however, some tumors derived from the adrenal medulla take up
Pentetreotide though they do take up MIBG and vice versa (Figure 8).

6
Cancer Biomarkers
Robert H. Getzenberg
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern
University, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA

What Is a Cancer Biomarker?
Although this may seem like a semantic point, it is important to start this chapter
with a definition of what a cancer biomarker is. This is relevant for the obvious
reason that there should be a clear understanding of what is being discussed here.
Further, it raises the point that how we define a cancer biomarker is evolving as
we develop more and better tools by which to identify such markers as well as
optimize our approaches to validating and implementing these markers along
with optimizing the clinical questions that they address. For the purpose of this
chapter, the focus will be on blood and tissue‐based biomarkers. Using the definition of a biomarker found on dictionary.com, a biomarker is, “a distinct biochemical, genetic, or molecular characteristic or substance that is an indicator of a
particular biological ­condition or process.” The descriptor of biomarker includes
both individual and combinations of markers. Although imaging can be considered as one of the earliest types of cancer biomarkers that has been widely adapted
across many cancer types, imaging approaches will not be discussed here. There
are many types of biomarkers that are utilized in cancer and the attention of this
chapter will be on the serum and tissue type markers in solid tumors with no
Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

107

108

Canc er Biomarkers

d­ iscussion of their utility in hematologic ­cancers. Finally, examples of cancer
biomarkers will be provided below.
How Are Cancer Biomarkers Being Used?
In the era of what is being described as the personalized approach to cancer,
b­ iomarkers are front and center. They are being developed or in current use in the
entire spectrum of cancer from screening to diagnosis to prognosis and therapeutic
selection/optimization. There are a number of factors that enter into the equation
of the utility of a cancer biomarker. Obviously, these are based primarily on
the clinical and performance characteristics of the tool. Financial factors are
­considered as well including the cost of the test, the clinical value that the b­ iomarker
brings to the individual patient, and the more global cost to the healthcare system
that is expensed as part of the biomarker utilization.
Types of Cancer Biomarkers
As stated above, for the purpose of this chapter, a biomarker will be defined as, “a distinct biochemical, genetic, or molecular characteristic or substance that is an indicator
of a particular biological condition or process” and the focus will be upon those related
to cancer. This remains a very broad definition with many entities fulfilling it. There
are many types of cancer biomarkers and they are defined by the type of biomarker
that they are, i.e., protein, DNA, RNA, exosomes, Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC) etc.,
as well as the source of the biomarker, i.e., body fluids such as blood (serum, plasma,
whole blood), urine, semen, and saliva or tissue such as from biopsies or resections.
From the tissue perspective, morphological changes are the oldest cancer biomarkers
since Virchow originally identified the cellular changes associated with cancer [1].
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses are used to stain for proteins that are associated
with cancer. These stains are often used in conjunction with the morphological analysis performed by a pathologist in examining a biopsy or tissue sample. Fluorescence
in‐situ hybridization (FISH) is a complementary approach to IHC analysis with the
exception of its use in the detection of nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) probes as opposed
to proteins. Proteomic approaches have revealed individual markers and panels of
proteins both in tissue and in blood/urine that have apparent clinical utility. These
include analyses of serum proteins as well as proteins within the cancer cell along
with the microenvironment in which the cancer cell exists. Whole genome/epigenome‐based approaches are becoming more commonplace and the signatures obtained
from these comprehensive analyses of the tumors are just being implemented into the
clinical care paradigms for cancer patients. Despite the increased use of genomics as
a tool for selecting the most appropriate course of cancer treatment, there are still
questions about the current state of its utility with agreement that there is still a great
deal to do to make the genomic analysis of tumors of commonplace [2].
There are a variety of sources for cancer biomarkers. Tumor specific markers are those that appear to be relatively uniquely expressed within the cancer

Challenges in the Implementation of Can c er Biomarkers

109

that exists. Cell cycle markers are associated with the cellular progression
through the cell cycle and with the faster mitotic rates typically associated
with cancers and are often used as indicators of tumor growth most often at
the tissue level. Similarly, metabolic changes are hallmarks of the cancer
process and cancer associated changes can be utilized as biomarkers [3].
Changes in energy metabolism were an early recognized characteristic of cancer cells [4] and modern approaches to deciphering the metabolic changes
associated with cancer have revealed cancer biomarkers. Some of the biomarkers that have been used the longest are those that depict the genetic basis
of cancers that can be somatic or germline. Although the existence of epigenetic changes associated with cancer have been identified more recently than
their genetic counterparts, a significant amount of effort has been dedicated to
the identification and validation of these genetic changes along with their
potential use as biomarkers. Changes that are associated with the metastatic
process have also been used as biomarkers of cancer. Finally, systemic
responses to the presence of the cancer(s) can also be utilized as biomarkers.
As an example, indicators of an immune response to the cancer can be used as
a sentinel of the presence of cancer as well as potential predictors of therapeutic response [5].

Challenges in the Implementation of Cancer Biomarkers
Although there has been a relative explosion of cancer biomarkers over the past
decade, with the advances that have been made in our understanding of cancer, it
would seem that there should be more. There are complexities at every level of cancer biomarker discovery and development that make clinically useful biomarkers
difficult to obtain. These complexities are related to issues such as heterogeneity,
the lack of translatability from the lab to the clinic and the apparent lack of many
truly cancer specific changes (i.e., fingerprints) that can serve as highly specific
biomarkers.
Tumor heterogeneity is among the most perplexing issues related to the implementation of cancer biomarkers and similarly to therapeutic efficacy [6]. Simply
stated, tumors rarely uniformly express a single biomarker. For example, in what
is considered to be estrogen receptor (ER) or progesterone receptor (PR) positive
breast cancer, not all of the cells express the receptors. In fact, the tumor is considered to be ER and/or PR positive if at least 1% of the cells examined have
estrogen and/or progesterone receptors [7]. Prostate specific antigen (PSA), one
of the most commonly used clinical biomarkers in cancer as well as the androgen
receptor, a hormone driver of its expression, are typically not expressed in every
cell within a tumor. Similarly genetic and epigenetic markers are typically not
uniformly expressed within a tumor. To make things more complex, the surrounding pathologically normal tissue may demonstrate some heterogeneity and
­represent a type of field effect with some of the signatures that are found in the
associated tumor.

110

Canc er Biomarkers

Heterogeneity may also exist within an individual. For example, if multiple foci
of disease exist, these may differ in the expression of biomarkers [8]. While the
biology of these differences is beyond the scope of this chapter, these are considered to be either as a result of tumors that have arisen independently or offshoots
of a single lesion. This makes the identification and validation of cancer biomarkers very difficult since it is not always clear what the specific signature of a tumor
is and therefore the biomarkers that define it may be difficult to discern. Further,
the primary lesion(s) may differ in expression of biomarkers from the resulting
metastatic lesions and even these metastatic lesions may be heterogeneous.
Therefore this biologically derived heterogeneity makes the description of true
cancer‐specific biomarkers difficult, if not impossible.
Another level of heterogeneity exists between individuals. This occurs even
within normal individuals. For example, for normal laboratory tests, there are
ranges of what is considered to be normal. We are all unique. This problem is quite
evident in prostate cancer where, as will be described in more detail below, PSA is
used as a blood‐based biomarker. PSA is a kallikrein protein that is expressed normally within the prostatic epithelia but is often aberrantly secreted into the bloodstream in men with prostate cancer. The blood levels that are considered to be
“normal” are a range and can be influenced by noncancerous conditions including
inflammation, benign growth, age, and the size of the prostate. Therefore normal
variation can muddy the value of cancer biomarkers.
Finally, as mentioned below, one of the challenges in the clinical implementation of cancer biomarkers has been assay heterogeneity. In other words, even when
a biomarker is identified, the development of standardized and reproducible assays
with which to detect the marker(s) can be problematic [9]. The same result needs
to be obtained every time an assay is run regardless of where it is run to increase
the utility of such biomarkers.
Cancer Specificity?
The complexity of cancer, as described briefly above, makes the existence and
discovery of cancer‐specific biomarkers difficult. As described earlier, many of the
identified cancer biomarkers are not truly cancer specific and result from altered or
de‐differentiated expression changes. As a result, the struggle with the specificity
of cancer biomarkers starts at the biology and continues on to the development of
clinical tests. The clinical tests can only be as good as the biomarkers that they are
assaying and this limitation has certainly been at the center of the difficult path
toward clinically useful cancer biomarkers.
Translation From Laboratory to Clinic
The journey from the discovery of a cancer biomarker to its clinical utility is an
arduous one that few cancer biomarkers have survived. There are many reasons to
explain this. As described above, tumor heterogeneity and the issues related to

Examples of Major Can cer Biomarkers by Tumor Type

111

cancer specificity make the actual discovery process, difficult. Margaret Pepe and
colleagues developed a concept of the five phases of cancer biomarker development [10]. These include the preclinical exploratory studies that result in the identification of the biomarker(s) of interest (Phase 1); the development of a clinical
assay for the detection of the biomarker(s) of interest (Phase 2); the utilization of
the clinical assay to probe a retrospectively collected longitudinal repository, the
most common type of sample collections that exist today (Phase 3); the evaluation
of the clinical assay in a prospective study, i.e., how does it work in a real world
scenario (Phase 4); and, if appropriate, an evaluation of the clinical assay in a
screening type environment, the holy grail of many cancer biomarkers (Phase 5).
These stages of biomarker development and evaluation are logical and follow, in a
parallel fashion, the phase of trials required for drug development. Similar to drug
development, few cancer biomarkers make their way through this process. Unlike
the development of therapeutics, until recently, few cancer biomarkers actually
went through this logical series of studies and therefore the waters have been muddied by small, improperly designed and executed studies. Despite this, efforts such
as that being conducted by the NCI’s Early Detection Research Network (http://
edrn.nci.nih.gov), have brought this type of scientific rigor to the process of cancer
biomarker development and are producing the types of data that are necessary for
clinical adaptation of cancer biomarkers.
Examples of Major Cancer Biomarkers by Tumor Type
This chapter will focus on selected cancer types along with markers that have demonstrated clinical utility in order to provide a perspective on the types of cancer
biomarkers and how they may be utilized today.
Breast Cancer
Breast cancer is an example of where biomarkers have greatly impacted the clinical course of the disease at different levels. Biomarkers are utilized in aiding the
determination of an individual’s risk for developing the disease and therefore helping to guide the course of screening and monitoring. Genetic alterations such as
those found in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes [11] have been used to identify
women at increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer [12]. Although these mutations are only associated with a relatively small percentage of either breast or ovarian cancers, they have provided guidance to women and may result in enhancing
their screening approaches and/or chemoprevention [13]. These are among the
growing number of germline mutations that are found in DNA typically isolated
from a blood or saliva sample.
Once a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer, based upon pathologic examination of biopsies of their breast tissue, biomarkers are again used to aid in the characterization of the type of breast cancer and therefore provide both prognostic

112

Canc er Biomarkers

information as well as guidance related to the most effective therapeutic interventions. In addition to the pathologic subtype of breast cancer that is determined by
its morphology, IHC staining is performed in order to determine the expression of
hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) as well as to determine the Her2
status of the patient [7]. Her2 status can also be determined by examining the
expression of the encoding RNA using FISH and androgen receptor status is now
being more commonly analyzed by IHC as with the other hormone receptors. The
expression of the androgen receptor, particularly when combined with the other
steroid hormones described above, can also serve as a prognostic factor as well as
guide treatment planning [14]. The resulting expression patterns provide clinically
useful information and are being utilized to guide therapeutic strategies. In addition to the information provided from these biomarkers, molecular classifications
of breast cancer samples has provided for the identification of subgroups that may
indeed have differential therapeutic responses [15, 16]. To increase the predictive
ability of an individual gene or multiple genes, a 21‐gene test has been developed
to predict recurrence in postmenopausal women treated with anastrozole or tamoxifen. In this study of 1231 evaluable patients, based upon low, intermediate, or high
score using the 21‐gene set, this set of genes was shown to be an independent predictor of recurrence [17]. A recent proteomic analysis revealed that the tissue
expression of ubiquitin and truncated S100P identified the presence of breast cancer with a high level of sensitivity and specificity ([18]).
Examination and/or enumeration of circulating cells, which are typically
described as circulating tumor cells (CTCs), has been applied to many cancer
types but none as much as they have to breast cancer. The clinically utilized tool
of CTC enumeration has been FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved
utilizing the CellSearch system (Veridex Inc.). A number of studies have validated
that less than five CTCs per 7.5 ml sample is correlative with a better outcome
[19, 20]. Despite this, a recent Phase 3 study found that simple enumeration of
CTCs with the CellSearch system to support treatment decisions was not associated with improved outcomes [21]. An alternative approach to quantifying CTCs
associated with breast cancer has also recently been described [22]. It is apparent
from these studies that while counting the number of CTCs may have value to
truly impact clinical decisions we need different approaches. These approaches
are focusing on two major areas. The first is in delineating and characterizing the
cells that are found circulating in the bloodstream of cancer patients. Historically,
CTCs are identified as cells possessing epithelial cell adhesion molecule, EpCAM,
on their surface. Utilizing anti‐EpCAM antibodies, these cells are then separated
from the other cell types found in the blood and then further characterized. Recent
studies have demonstrated that many important cells involved in the cancer process may not possess EpCAM on their surface and therefore go undetected by
these approaches. This will be discussed in more detail in the section on prostate
cancer biomarkers. Further, even in the EpCAM containing CTCs, enumeration
may not be sufficient and molecular characterization of the isolated cells may
be critical to defining the essential clinical information [23–25]. Despite the

Examples of Major Can cer Biomarkers by Tumor Type

113

c­ omplexity of cell types found within the blood, we are clearly just beginning
to decipher the information contained within along with its correlation with the
clinical value of these signatures.
Prostate Cancer
As we look at the utility of body‐fluid‐based biomarkers for the detection of cancer,
the one that has been in clinical use the longest is a biomarker of prostate cancer,
PSA. PSA was approved by the US FDA in 1986 along with DRE (digital rectal
examination) for the early detection of prostate cancer [26]. In order to determine
the potential clinical utility of PSA, it is important to understand some of the biology that underlies this biomarker. PSA is distinct from many of the types of cancer‐related biomarkers described above in that its expression is not actually cancer
specific. PSA is a member of the kallikrein‐related peptidase family and is a glycoprotein enzyme encoded in humans by the KLK3 gene. PSA is secreted by the
epithelial cells of the prostate gland into the prostatic acini where it becomes a
component of the ejaculate and contributes to the liquefaction of semen and may
also be involved in degrading cervical mucus in the female. It is found primarily in
the prostate but has also been shown to be expressed in the salivary glands and in
breast tissue among others. While the expression of PSA is not cancer specific, as
a secretory epithelial protein, it is normally not found in the bloodstream at significant levels. In cancer, as well as in some benign states like prostatic inflammation
and BPH, the prostatic architecture can be disrupted and instead of PSA being
secreted into the ejaculate, it ends up in the blood as well. The detection of PSA in
the bloodstream has been utilized as a tool with which to identify those men at risk
for having prostate cancer as well as a tool to follow the extent of prostate cancer
in men already diagnosed with the disease [26].
Therefore, PSA is not a classic cancer biomarker but as a single blood‐based
cancer biomarker has had more impact than any other. Since its widespread clinical adoption, the number of men that present for the first time with metastatic
prostate cancer has decreased significantly. The European Randomized Study of
Screening for Prostate Cancer did find that screening with PSA does result in a
significant reduction of deaths from prostate cancer [27]. Although beyond the
scope of this chapter, controversy regarding its use rests primarily with what are
considered to be elevated levels of PSA and how the findings are handled clinically. Furthermore, despite evidence of limited efficacy in older men, the number
of men 75 years of age and older being screened for prostate cancer with PSA
remains high [28]. The US Preventive Services Task Force has recently updated its
recommendation to indicate that men aged 55–69 should make the personal decision, together with their clinician and considering the potential harms and benefits,
on whether to undergo periodic PSA‐based screening for prostate cancer [29].
Several approaches have been used to improve upon the clinical utility of PSA.
The prostate health index (phi) takes into consideration the precursor form of PSA,

114

Canc er Biomarkers

proPSA, as well as the unbound or free PSA, fPSA in a formula (phi = [−2] proPSA/
fPSA × PSA1/2). Phi has been shown to have increased accuracy at predicting the
presence of prostate cancer on biopsy than PSA alone [30]. A panel of four kallikreins, the 4Kscore (OPKO Health, Inc.) detected within the blood has been demonstrated to predict the risk of having prostate cancer as well as its potential
aggressiveness. In a recent study of 4765 men, the 4Kscore was able to predict the
detection of prostate cancer by 10‐core biopsy as well as detect high‐grade disease
[31]. This test is now being rapidly incorporated into clinical practice with large
studies supporting its utility [32].
A proteomic approach has identified an eight biomarker assay based upon proteins that were qualified from a candidate list of 11 such biomarkers. In a clinical
validation of these eight protein biomarkers, 318 patients that were biopsied along
with matching prostatectomy specimens demonstrated that the this assay could
separate those with favorable and nonfavorable pathology (AUC 0.68, OR 20.9) as
well as Gleason Score 6 versus non‐Gleason Score 6 disease (AUC 0.65, OR
12.95) [33]. This assay being commercialized by Metamark Genetics Inc., appears
to provide information that is additive to the currently available clinical tools.
A unique aspect of urologic cancers, including prostate cancer, is their exposure
to the urinary system and therefore the ability to detect biomarkers within the
urine. With the compartmentalized exposure of these organs, this media provides
an added degree of specificity to the detection of cancer related biomarkers. One
such biomarker is PCA3, an mRNA that does not appear to encode a protein but
which appears within the urine of men with prostate cancer [34]. Urine‐based
PCA3 is approved for the detection of prostate cancer in men who have previously
had a negative biopsy. In a recent meta‐analysis, using a cutoff of 20, investigators
reported a sensitivity of 72%, a specificity of 53%, and a diagnostic odds ratio of
3.18 [35]. Another source of urine‐based biomarker of prostate cancer is exosomes
that are isolated from the urine and are then used to decipher an RNA signature that
has focused upon ERG and PCA3. In a recent study, the negative predictive value
(NPV) and positive predictive value (PDV) were 98.6% and 34.7% respectively for
the detection of more aggressive prostate cancer [36]. In another example of using
urine as a media in which to noninvasively study what is going on within the prostate, a three‐gene panel of urinary markers was recently identified and in preliminary studies was shown to be correlative with higher Gleason score ≥ 7, i.e., more
aggressive prostate cancer [37].
There have been significant advances in the development and validation of
genomic and epigenetic tools that appear to provide clinically useful diagnostic
and prognostic information for individuals with prostate cancer. The Oncotype
DX test (Genomic Health, Inc.) analyzes a genomic prostate score (GPS) that
­combines the expression of 17 genes originally identified from analyzing prostatectomy samples to identify patients with aggressive prostate cancer [38, 39]. The
17 gene set, which contains genes from a number of cancer associated pathways,
has been validated using biopsy samples obtained at the time of diagnosis and is
predictive of the presence of high grade and high stage disease (OR = 2.1) [40].

Examples of Major Can cer Biomarkers by Tumor Type

115

Prolaris (Myriad Genetics, Inc.) is a test that utilizes a set of 46 genes that are
focused upon cell cycle progression (CCP). Although the mitotic index of prostate
cancer is not considered to be high, cancer cells in general, proceed through the cell
cycle at higher rates than their normal counterparts and therefore biomarkers of this
proliferative state have been of clinical value. In a study of biopsy samples from 761
men that then went on to have radical prostatectomies, the Prolaris test provided
significant predictive information regarding the risk of progression of these men to
either biochemical recurrence and/or the development of metastases using either
univariate (hazard ration = 2.08) or multivariate analysis (hazard ratio = 1.76) [41].
The third example of the genetic tests being utilized in prostate cancer is the
Decipher Prostate Cancer Classifier (GenomeDx Biosciences). This test is designed
to provide prognostic information post‐radical prostatectomy. In a study of
260 men, 99 of which went on to develop metastases, the Decipher test was
­significantly correlated with biochemical recurrence, metastasis as well as prostate
cancer specific mortality. In individuals with high and low Decipher scores, the
cumulative incidence of metastasis was 47 and 12%, respectively [42]. Other
­studies have supported these findings.
The ConfirmMDx is an epigenetic assay that uses methylation specific PCR to
examine the hypermethylation of selected genes including GSTP1, APC, and
RASSFI in a prostatic biopsy core. This test was developed to help to rule out false‐
negative biopsies and provides strong predictive information regarding the potential
to detect prostate cancer on a repeated prostatic biopsy (Odds Ratio of 3.01) [43].
MicroRNAs signatures have been developed and are being applied. At this point
they still need clinical validation but provide yet additional genomic tools of potential value [44].
Although not as clinically advanced as their use has been in breast cancer, CTCs
have also begun to take their place in the prostate cancer paradigm. One limitation
to the enumeration of CTCs using the CellSearch Instrument (Veridex, Inc.) is that
approximately 50% of the men with prostate cancer have undetectable CTCs [45].
On the contrary, the detection of CellSearch defined CTCs has been rare in men
with clinically localized disease [46]. The baseline number of CTCs has been
shown to be predictive of prostate cancer specific survival with those with five or
more cells per 7.5 ml having a poorer outcome [47]. Combination of CTC enumeration and the blood marker, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) has been shown to
be a surrogate of survival in men on a study of abiraterone plus prednisone versus
prednisone alone [48]. Combining other markers like LDH with the CTC enumeration may provide additional value to these measurements. Since the original enumeration studies, a number of groups have been developing approaches to
characterizing the cells that are found within the blood. An example of the type of
relevance of this approach is the exciting work from Jun Luo, Emmanuel
Antonarakis, and colleagues in which they have identified the existence of a variant of the androgen receptor (AR‐V7) within the circulating cells of men with
prostate cancer and have shown the expression of this variant in the circulating
cells is predictive of response to commonly used therapies for the disease [49, 50].

116

Canc er Biomarkers

Work from Epic Sciences is going beyond the EpCAM selection of the CTCs and
characterizing all of the cells found within the blood using morphologic and genetic
markers of the isolated cells [51, 52]. We are just entering the era in which circulating cells can be utilized as liquid biopsies and many approaches are being investigated with direct clinical correlation.
In addition to the markers/tests described above, there are many novel ­biomarkers
that are being evaluated for their clinical utility. As with breast cancer, in addition
to the classical utility of cancer biomarkers, prostate cancer biomarkers are being
developed to determine those most appropriate or inappropriate for active surveillance as well as men that may respond to individual therapeutic approaches. In
addition to individual biomarkers, panels of markers are being developed. Among
these panels of markers being explored are cancer/testis antigens, which appear to
be indicative of more advanced prostate cancer [53] and can be detected utilizing a
nanowire‐based approach [54]. Another panel of markers includes three serum
phospholipids that may be indicative of the presence of the disease [55].
Bladder Cancer
As described briefly above related to prostate cancer, bladder cancer is relatively
unique in its access to urine as a source of biomarkers. Examination of cells found
within the urine, cytology, has been a mainstay of bladder cancer diagnosis. While
cytology has a high degree of specificity, if you see cancer cells in the urine, they
must have come from somewhere, sensitivity is considered to be limited [56]. As
an additive tool to cytology, FISH, which can detect aneuploidy in chromosomes
3, 7, and 17 as well as loss of the 9p21 locus (UroVysion, Abbott Molecular Inc.),
has been added. While the bladder is seemingly an ideal cancer type to develop
specific biomarkers, based upon its constant bathing in urine, this media has been
a difficult one with which to develop biomarkers. Markers, including NMP‐22,
AccuDx, a fibrin‐fibrinogen degradation product and BTA have been FDA
approved but are not widely utilized. Prognostic biomarkers for bladder cancer
have been reviewed [57]. BLCA‐4 is a urine‐based biomarker for bladder cancer
that has now been validated in a number of studies by different groups [58–61].
Despite its potential promise, the absence of commercial development of this biomarker has limited its further validation. Genomic Health has recently developed a
liquid biopsy test in which they examine multiple biomarkers within the urine. In
a recent report from their proof‐of‐concept study, they describe a negative predictive value for high‐risk recurrence of 95% [62]. Obviously, further validation is
needed but this approach appears promising.
Lung Cancer
Although lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States,
there are few biomarkers for the disease and the disease is often detected either
through incidental imaging tests or by presenting symptoms but typically not until

Con c lusions

117

it is already advanced. Among the blood‐based biomarkers are those that are found
to be elevated in several cancer types, in particular aggressive variants. These biomarkers include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cytokeratin 19, carbohydrate
antigen‐125 (CA–125), and neuron‐specific enolase (NSE) [63]. These are considered to be relatively nonspecific markers that represent either a more embryonic
state, mesenchymal transition, and/or de‐differentiation of the epithelial cell and, as
such, are also utilized as biomarkers for a number of cancer types. There are numerous new markers currently under investigation. Included among these are proteomic
markers, miRNAs, genomic changes, metabolites as well as circulating DNA.
Melanoma
While the visualization of melanoma lesions on the skin provides for an easier risk
stratification and biopsy for diagnosis, the prognosis of individuals with such
lesions covers a spectrum. A number of serum biomarkers have been explored to
determine their utility as prognostic markers. These include, LDH, tyrosinase, and
vascular endothelial growth factor [64]. At least some melanomas have been shown
to induce an immune response and indicators of such a response have likewise
been developed into biomarkers of the disease as well as potential predictors of
therapeutic response.
Colon Cancer
The landscape of colon cancer has changed significantly with the incorporation of
screening colonoscopies into clinical practice. This has resulted in most individuals
with colorectal tumors presenting with localized disease [64]. Based upon the typical availability of tissue resulting from biopsies and resections, genetic biomarkers
have been extensively examined. Mutations in the APC gene are very common and
mutations in the BRAF gene along with microsatellite instability as a result of inactivation of the DNA mismatch repair system are more typically found in Lynch
syndrome [65]. Oncotype Dx (Genomic Health Inc.) has developed a multigene
colon cancer assay, which may add to the prediction of recurrence in patients with
stage 2 and 3 colon cancers [66]. As with the other cancer types described above,
there are a number of novel biomarkers being developed and validated.

Conclusions
This is an exciting time in the development and application of novel cancer biomarkers. The latest technologies are being applied to identify not just the typical
biomarkers associated with the diagnosis or prognosis of the disease but biomarkers that can aid in the prediction of response to individual therapies. These markers
are guiding the personalization of cancer therapy and helping to direct whether

118

Canc er Biomarkers

surgery, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, radiation therapy, and/or other
approaches have the best chance for success. The next several years will provide
cancer patients with the realization of these efforts.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Ms. Suzanne Hendrix for her valuable editorial assistance.
References
1. Mukherjee, S. (2010). The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer. New York: Scribner.
2. Kaiser, J. (2018). Is genome‐guided cancer treatment hyped? Science 360 (6387): 365.
3. Vermeersch, K.A. and Styczynski, M.P. (2013). Applications of metabolomics in cancer research.
J. Carcinog. 12: 9.
4. Warburg, O. (1925). The metabolism of carcinoma Cells. J. Cancer Res. 9 (1): 148–163.
5. Bigbee, W.H.R. (2003). Tumor markers and immunodiagnosis. In: Holland‐Frei Cancer
Medicine, 6e (ed. P.R. Kufe, R.E. Pollock, R.R. Weichselbaum, et al.). Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada: BC Decker Inc.
6. Pribluda, A., de la Cruz, C.C., and Jackson, E.L. (2015). Intratumoral heterogeneity: from
­diversity comes resistance. Clin. Cancer Res. 21 (13): 2916–2923.
7. Hammond, M.E., Hayes, D.F., Dowsett, M. et al. (2010). American society of clinical oncology/
college of American pathologists guideline recommendations for immunohistochemical testing
of estrogen and progesterone receptors in breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 28 (16): 2784–2795.
8. Aryee, M.J., Liu, W., Engelmann, J.C. et al. (2013). DNA methylation alterations exhibit intraindividual stability and interindividual heterogeneity in prostate cancer metastases. Sci. Transl.
Med. 5 (169): 169ra110.
9. de Gramont, A., Watson, S., Ellis, L.M. et al. (2015). Pragmatic issues in biomarker evaluation
for targeted therapies in cancer. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 12 (4): 197–212.
10. Pepe, M.S., Etzioni, R., Feng, Z. et al. (2001). Phases of biomarker development for early
­detection of cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 93 (14): 1054–1061.
11. Welcsh, P.L. and King, M.C. (2001). BRCA1 and BRCA2 and the genetics of breast and ovarian
cancer. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10 (7): 705–713.
12. Easton, D.F. (1999). How many more breast cancer predisposition genes are there? Breast
Cancer Res. 1 (1): 14–17.
13. King, M.C., Wieand, S., Hale, K. et al. (2001). Tamoxifen and breast cancer incidence among
women with inherited mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2: national surgical adjuvant breast and
bowel project (NSABP‐P1) breast cancer prevention trial. JAMA 286 (18): 2251–2256.
14. Zhang, L., Fang, C., Xu, X. et al. (2015). Androgen receptor, EGFR, and BRCA1 as biomarkers
in triple‐negative breast cancer: a meta‐analysis. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015: 357485.
15. Curtis, C., Shah, S.P., Chin, S.F. et al. (2012). The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of
2,000 breast tumours reveals novel subgroups. Nature 486 (7403): 346–352.
16. Lehmann, B.D., Bauer, J.A., Chen, X. et al. (2011). Identification of human triple‐negative
breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies. J. Clin. Invest.
121 (7): 2750–2767.
17. Dowsett, M., Cuzick, J., Wale, C. et al. (2010). Prediction of risk of distant recurrence using the
21‐gene recurrence score in node‐negative and node‐positive postmenopausal patients with

REFERENC ES	

18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

119

breast cancer treated with anastrozole or tamoxifen: a TransATAC study. J. Clin. Oncol. 28 (11):
1829–1834.
Chung, L., Shibli, S., Moore, K. et al. (2013). Tissue biomarkers of breast cancer and their
­association with conventional pathologic features. Br. J. Cancer 108 (2): 351–360.
Cristofanilli, M., Hayes, D.F., Budd, G.T. et al. (2005). Circulating tumor cells: a novel prognostic
factor for newly diagnosed metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 23 (7): 1420–1430.
Pierga, J.Y., Hajage, D., Bachelot, T. et al. (2012). High independent prognostic and predictive
value of circulating tumor cells compared with serum tumor markers in a large prospective trial
in first‐line chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer patients. Ann. Oncol. 23 (3): 618–624.
Smerage, J.B., Barlow, W.E., Hortobagyi, G.N. et al. (2014). Circulating tumor cells and response
to chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer: SWOG S0500. J. Clin. Oncol. 32 (31): 3483–3489.
Magbanua, M.J., Carey, L.A., DeLuca, A. et al. (2015). Circulating tumor cell analysis in
­metastatic triple‐negative breast cancers. Clin. Cancer Res. 21 (5): 1098–1105.
Jiang, Z.F., Cristofanilli, M., Shao, Z.M. et al. (2013). Circulating tumor cells predict p­ rogression‐
free and overall survival in Chinese patients with metastatic breast cancer, HER2‐positive or
triple‐negative (CBCSG004): a multicenter, double‐blind, prospective trial. Ann. Oncol. 24 (11):
2766–2772.
Magbanua, M.J. and Park, J.W. (2014). Advances in genomic characterization of circulating
tumor cells. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 33 (2–3): 757–769.
Smirnov, D.A., Zweitzig, D.R., Foulk, B.W. et al. (2005). Global gene expression profiling of
circulating tumor cells. Cancer Res. 65 (12): 4993–4997.
De Angelis, G., Rittenhouse, H.G., Mikolajczyk, S.D. et al. (2007). Twenty years of PSA: from
prostate antigen to tumor marker. Rev. Urol. 9 (3): 113–123.
Schroder, F.H., Hugosson, J., Roobol, M.J. et al. (2012). Prostate‐cancer mortality at 11 years of
follow‐up. N. Engl. J. Med. 366 (11): 981–990.
Drazer, M.W., Huo, D., and Eggener, S.E. (2015). National prostate cancer screening rates after
the 2012 US preventive services task force recommendation discouraging prostate‐specific
­antigen‐based screening. J. Clin. Oncol. 33 (22): 2416–2423.
Grossman, D.C., Curry, S.J., Owens, D.K. et al. (2018). Screening for prostate cancer:
US ­preventive services task force recommendation statement. JAMA 319 (18): 1901–1903.
Stephan, C., Vincendeau, S., Houlgatte, A. et al. (2013). Multicenter evaluation of [‐2]
proprostate‐specific antigen and the prostate health index for detecting prostate cancer.
Clin. Chem. 59 (1): 306–314.
Bryant, R.J., Sjoberg, D.D., Vickers, A.J. et al. (2015). Predicting high‐grade cancer at ten‐core
prostate biopsy using four kallikrein markers measured in blood in the protecT study. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 107 (7): Available online at: https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/107/7/
djv095/913174.
Punnen, S., Pavan, N., and Parekh, D.J. (2015). Finding the wolf in sheep’s clothing: the 4Kscore
is a novel blood test that can accurately identify the risk of aggressive prostate cancer. Rev. Urol.
17 (1): 3–13.
Blume‐Jensen, P., Berman, D.M., Rimm, D.L. et al. (2015). Development and clinical validation
of an in situ biopsy‐based multimarker assay for risk stratification in prostate cancer. Clin.
Cancer Res. 21 (11): 2591–2600.
Bussemakers, M.J., van Bokhoven, A., Verhaegh, G.W. et al. (1999). DD3: a new prostate‐
specific gene, highly overexpressed in prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 59 (23): 5975–5979.
Luo, Y., Gou, X., Huang, P. et al. (2014). The PCA3 test for guiding repeat biopsy of prostate
cancer and its cut‐off score: a systematic review and meta‐analysis. Asian J. Androl. 16 (3):
487–492.
Donovan, M. J., Noerholm, M., Bentink, S., et al.(2015). “A first catch, non‐DRE urine exosome
gene signature to predict Gleason 7 prostate cancer on an initial prostate needle biopsy.” 2015
Genitourinary Cancers Symposium (ASCO GU).

120

Canc er Biomarkers

37. Leyten, G.H., Hessels, D., Smit, F.P. et al. (2015). Identification of a candidate gene panel for the
early diagnosis of prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 21 (13): 3061–3070.
38. Badani, K.K., Kemeter, M.J., Febbo, P.G. et al. (2015). The impact of a biopsy based 17‐gene
genomic prostate score on treatment recommendations in men with newly diagnosed clinically
prostate cancer who are candidates for active surveillance. Urol. Pract. 2 (4): 181–189.
39. Cullen, J., Rosner, I.L., Brand, T.C. et al. (2015). A Biopsy‐based 17‐gene genomic prostate
score predicts recurrence after radical prostatectomy and adverse surgical pathology in a racially
diverse population of men with clinically low‐ and intermediate‐risk prostate cancer. Eur. Urol.
68 (1): 123–131.
40. Klein, E.A., Cooperberg, M.R., Magi‐Galluzzi, C. et al. (2014). A 17‐gene assay to predict
­prostate cancer aggressiveness in the context of Gleason grade heterogeneity, tumor multifocality,
and biopsy undersampling. Eur. Urol. 66 (3): 550–560.
41. Cuzick, J., Stone, S., Fisher, G. et al. (2015). Validation of an RNA cell cycle progression score
for predicting death from prostate cancer in a conservatively managed needle biopsy cohort.
Br. J. Cancer 113 (3): 382–389.
42. Ross, A.E., Johnson, M.H., Yousefi, K. et al. (2015). Tissue‐based genomics augments post‐
prostatectomy risk stratification in a natural history cohort of intermediate‐ and high‐risk men.
Eur. Urol. 69 (1): 157–165.
43. Partin, A.W., Van Neste, L., Klein, E.A. et al. (2014). Clinical validation of an epigenetic assay
to predict negative histopathological results in repeat prostate biopsies. J. Urol. 192 (4):
1081–1087.
44. Wen, X., Deng, F.M., and Wang, J. (2014). MicroRNAs as predictive biomarkers and therapeutic
targets in prostate cancer. Am. J. Clin. Exp. Urol. 2 (3): 219–230.
45. Halabi, S., Small, E.J., Hayes, D.F. et al. (2003). Prognostic significance of reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction for prostate‐specific antigen in metastatic prostate cancer: a nested
study within CALGB 9583. J. Clin. Oncol. 21 (3): 490–495.
46. Khurana, K.K., Grane, R., Borden, E.C. et al. (2013). Prevalence of circulating tumor cells in
localized prostate cancer. Curr. Urol. 7 (2): 65–69.
47. Danila, D.C., Heller, G., Gignac, G.A. et al. (2007). Circulating tumor cell number and prognosis
in progressive castration‐resistant prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 13 (23): 7053–7058.
48. Scher, H.I., Heller, G., Molina, A. et al. (2015). Circulating tumor cell biomarker panel as an
individual‐level surrogate for survival in metastatic castration‐resistant prostate cancer. J. Clin.
Oncol. 33 (12): 1348–1355.
49. Antonarakis, E.S., Lu, C., Wang, H. et al. (2014). AR‐V7 and resistance to enzalutamide and
abiraterone in prostate cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 371 (11): 1028–1038.
50. Nakazawa, M., Lu, C., Chen, Y. et al. (2015). Serial blood‐based analysis of AR‐V7 in men with
advanced prostate cancer. Ann Oncol. 6 (9): 1859–1865.
51. Beltran, B., Jendrisak, A., Landers, M. et al. (2015). Phenotypic characterization of circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) from neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) and metastatic castration‐
resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) patients to identify a novel diagnostic algorithm for the presence of NEPC. 2015 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium. J. Clin. Oncol. 33 (suppl 7): abstr 197.
52. Scher, H., A. Jendrisak, J. Louw, et al. (2015). Predictive biomarkers of sensitivity to androgen
receptor signaling (ARS) and taxane‐based chemotherapy in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of
patients (pts) with metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). 2015 Genitourinary
Cancers Symposium, J Clin Oncol 33, (suppl 7; abstr 147).
53. Kulkarni, P., Shiraishi, T., Rajagopalan, K. et al. (2012). Cancer/testis antigens and urological
malignancies. Nat. Rev. Urol. 9 (7): 386–396.
54. Takahashi, S., Shiraishi, T., Miles, N. et al. (2015). Nanowire analysis of cancer‐testis antigens
as biomarkers of aggressive prostate cancer. Urology 85 (3): 704 e701–704 e707.
55. Patel, N., Vogel, R., Chandra‐Kuntal, K. et al. (2014). A novel three serum phospholipid panel
differentiates normal individuals from those with prostate cancer. PLoS One 9 (3): e88841.

REFERENC ES	

121

56. Ye, F., Wang, L., Castillo‐Martin, M. et al. (2014). Biomarkers for bladder cancer management:
present and future. Am. J. Clin. Exp. Urol. 2 (1): 1–14.
57. Habuchi, T., Marberger, M., Droller, M.J. et al. (2005). Prognostic markers for bladder cancer:
international consensus panel on bladder tumor markers. Urology 66 (6 Suppl 1): 64–74.
58. Guo, B., Che, T., Shi, B. et al. (2015). Interaction network analysis of differentially expressed
genes and screening of cancer marker in the urine of patients with invasive bladder cancer. Int. J.
Clin. Exp. Med. 8 (3): 3619–3628.
59. Konety, B.R., Nguyen, T.S., Brenes, G. et al. (2000). Clinical usefulness of the novel marker
BLCA‐4 for the detection of bladder cancer. J. Urol. 164 (3 Pt 1): 634–639.
60. Santoni, M., Catanzariti, F., Minardi, D. et al. (2012). Pathogenic and diagnostic potential of
BLCA‐1 and BLCA‐4 nuclear proteins in urothelial cell carcinoma of human bladder. Adv. Urol.
2012: 397412.
61. Wang, Z-Y., Li, H-Y., Wang, H. et al. (2018). Bladder cancer-specific nuclear matrix proteins-4
may be a potential biomarker for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer detection. Dis Markers,
article ID 5609395.
62. Genomic Health, I. (2015). Genomic Health Presents Positive Proof‐of‐Concept Data for Bladder
Cancer Liquid Biopsy Test REDWOOD CITY, Calif., PRNewswire.
63. Li, X., Asmitananda, T., Gao, L. et al. (2012). Biomarkers in the lung cancer diagnosis: a clinical
perspective. Neoplasma 59 (5): 500–507.
64. Karagiannis, P., Fittall, M., and Karagiannis, S.N. (2015). Evaluating biomarkers in melanoma.
Front. Oncol. 4: 383.
65. Bartley, A.N. and Hamilton, S.R. (2015). Select biomarkers for tumors of the gastrointestinal
tract: present and future. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 139 (4): 457–468.
66. You, Y.N., Rustin, R.B., and Sullivan, J.D. (2015). Oncotype DX colon cancer assay for prediction of recurrence risk in patients with stage II and III colon cancer: a review of the evidence.
Surg. Oncol. 24 (2): 61–66.

7
Molecular Diagnosis
Mark F. Evans
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine,
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA

Carcinogenesis is characterized by the dysregulation of mechanisms that maintain
cell, tissue, and body integrity. Molecular signatures of these processes are increasingly used as biomarkers for improved diagnostics and patient care. This chapter
reviews principles of clinical laboratory testing, molecular techniques, and their
diagnostic applications.
Clinical Diagnostics
Modern clinical diagnostics is founded on the pioneering studies of Giovanni
Battista Morgagni of Padua (1682–1771), the “father of anatomic pathology” and
Rudolf Virchow of Berlin (1821–1902), the “father of cellular pathology.”
Dr. Morgagni documented the relationship between diseases and the gross changes
observed in autopsy specimens; Dr. Virchow established the correlation of cellular
changes with disease having formulated the cellular theory of life, omnis cellula e
cellula (all cells come from cells). Molecular diagnostic techniques evaluate
­disease at the genetic and protein expression levels and are used to refine, define,
and extend the diagnostic capabilities of twenty‐first century medicine.
Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

123

124

Molecular Diagnosis

Laboratory Testing
Clinical laboratory testing is highly regulated. In the United States, all diagnostic
tests are performed in Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)
certificated laboratories. The CLIA Program is overseen by the Centers for
­
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and enforces national standards for test
performance. More than 250 000 US labs are CLIA regulated. Additionally, the
College of American Pathologists (CAP) provides a CMS recognized CAP
Laboratory Accreditation Program that involves periodic inspections of clinical
testing laboratories for compliance with an extensive checklist of testing criteria.
Around 6900 US labs are CAP accredited.
Many diagnostic tests have undergone US Federal Drug Administration (FDA)
validation for laboratory implementation. The FDA reviews proprietary in vitro
diagnostic tests for a variety of criteria including test repeatability, reproducibility,
comparability to or improvement over current standard of care procedures, and
dependent on the specific purpose of the test, test performance on different populations (e.g., by gender, age group, smoking status, concurrent health issues). Tests
may be “approved” (Premarket Approval [PMA] for devices that have undergone
clinical trials to demonstrate safety and effectiveness) or “cleared” (Premarket
Notification [510(k)] for devices and tests that are substantially equivalent to
­existing PMA certified diagnostic assays).
An extensive menu of molecular diagnostic tests is now offered in CLIA/CAP
certified labs. Those tests that are also FDA approved or cleared are highlighted in
this chapter to illustrate the scope of current molecular diagnostic tests.
Molecular Diagnostic Tests
Broadly, molecular diagnostic tests have four closely interrelated aims.
1. Denotative. The results of these tests have significant clinical implications
as they help support the formal naming and classification of a malignant
condition.
2. Prognostic. Favorable or unfavorable cancer prognoses are identified by
these assays.
3. Theranostic. Specific pharmacologic interventions are recommended on
the basis of these tests.
4. Patient Management. These procedures are for deciding the course of
patient monitoring, additional lab tests or clinical interventions.
Molecular diagnostics is concerned with the identification of “actionable”
biomarkers that have significant diagnostic, prognostic, therapeutic, or patient
management implications among cancer patient subgroups. Test results are
incorporated into decision trees so that patients are assigned to the most appropriate and timely healthcare support.

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

125

Guidelines for Test Selection
Guidance to physicians about which test(s) to choose for a particular cancer is
available from a variety of sources. These include recommendations by organizations such as the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) or the National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Additionally, medical subspecialty
governing bodies such as CAP [1] and national clinical centers such as the Mayo
Clinic provide guidelines. Diagnostic precision is further advanced by way of
­clinical research publications, conferences, and experimental protocols.
Molecular Techniques and Their Applications
The range of molecular diagnostic tests with FDA‐listed applications includes:
immunohistochemistry (IHC), in situ hybridization (ISH), polymerase chain reaction (PCR), sequencing technologies, microarray assay, transcription mediated
amplification (TMA), Invader chemistry, NanoString technology, hybrid capture
(HC), circulating tumor cell (CTC) detection, and proteomic assays.
IHC and ISH are applied to tissue sections and the data is reviewed by microscopy. These tests have the advantage of allowing protein and nucleic acids molecular expression to be interpreted directly in relationship to tumor morphology.
Other tests analyze nucleic acids or proteins extracted from ground‐up tissues but
allow the investigation of submicroscopic levels of molecular detail such as gene
sequence mutations.
Patient Specimens
Molecular diagnostic tests are applied to a wide range of patient samples including
freshly excised or flash‐frozen surgical excisions, formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded
(FFPE) tissues, fine needle aspirations (FNAs), cell scrapes, urine or other
­cytological specimens, blood serum or lymphocytes, and stool samples.
Fresh tissues specimens or tissue frozen under liquid nitrogen shortly after
­surgery retain the greatest preservation of in situ biological features, especially
DNA and RNA integrity. Other specimens require some form of fixation to ­preserve
tissues from cell autolysis or putrefaction due to bacterial or fungal infections.
Surgical/biopsy specimens are typically fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin,
which induce covalent cross‐links between proteins. The fixed tissues are then
embedded in paraffin to enable tissue storage and sectioning.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
IHC is used to screen for abnormal patterns of protein expression in a tissue by
microscopy [2]. The technique allows the localization and identification of cellular or
tissues constituents (antigens) by means of antigen–antibody interactions. The assay
was first conceived by Albert Coons in the early 1940s and developed for use on
FFPE specimens by Taylor and Burns in the mid‐1970s using enzyme‐­conjugated

126

Molecular Diagnosis

antibodies. IHC has been a routine diagnostic test since the 1990s ­following the
development of improved antigen specific antibody generating technologies and
­sensitive detection methodologies especially for IHC of FFPE specimens.
An antigen (antibody generator) is an entity recognized as foreign by the host
immune system and may be a protein or other biochemical construct. A given antigen may display a variety of features that can evoke an antibody response; these
features are referred as epitopes (antigenic determinants). Lab test antibodies may
be monoclonal or polyclonal. Monoclonal antibodies are mostly produced from
mice or rabbits and are in the form of epitope‐specific antibody clones. Polyclonal
antibodies detect multiple epitopes on a given antigen.
The IHC methodology involves pretreating slide mounted tissue sections to
make accessible antigens/epitopes that may have become masked during fixation.
A primary antibody is then applied to bind to the target antigen; the primary
­antibody is then detected using a secondary antibody conjugated with an enzyme
(typically horseradish peroxidase [HRP] or alkaline phosphatase [AP]). The
enzyme is demonstrated by application of an appropriate substrate that results in a
colored stain. In immunofluorescence (IF) the end point is a fluorescent dye.
IHC is assessed according to cellular compartment stained (nuclear, cytoplasmic, or
membranous); the proportion of cells showing staining; and, staining ­intensity ­(typically
rated negative, weak, moderate, or strong). For many clinical applications, histopathologists are trained specifically for the evaluation of a given IHC marker to ensure that
there is interpretative consensus between pathologists and across institutes.
Current FDA listed IHC applications are shown in Table 1. There are numerous
other IHC cancer diagnostic tests performed in CLIA certified/CAP accredited labs.
Our own institute has a battery of more than 200 diagnostic antibodies; some are
used on a daily basis others only very occasionally. Many clinical applications utilize
multimarker panels. For example, the IHC4 breast cancer test can be used to assess
residual risk of cancer recurrence for patients with estrogen receptor (ER) positive or
progesterone receptor (PgR) positive tumors treated with hormone therapies such as
tamoxifen. Tumor specimens are screened with antibodies against four antibodies –
standard of care markers: ER, PgR, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2), and a cell proliferation marker (Ki‐67). The stains are scored semi‐­
quantitatively with reference to percentage of cells stained and strength of staining;
the scores are then interrelated in an algorithm to assess risk of tumor recurrence [3].
Figure 1 includes examples of IHC used in the diagnosis of breast cancer.

Cytogenetics and In Situ Hybridization (ISH)
Clinical cytogenetics involves the short‐term culture of fresh tissues; metaphase chromosome spreads are then prepared onto glass slides from dividing culture cells.
Staining procedures show up chromosome specific banding patterns (karyotyping).
The detection of abnormal karyotypes (structural or numerical) is utilized in the diagnosis of a range of cancers including leukemias, lymphomas, renal cell carcinoma,
and soft tissue neoplasms. ISH is widely used to supplement traditional karyotyping.

127

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

T a b l e 1. FDA approved immunohistochemical tests for cancer diagnostics.
Cancer Type

Test Name

FDA PMA
Dates

Breast

a

HercepTest1 (also approved for
metastatic gastric or
gastroesophageal junction
adenocarcinomas*)
b
PATHWAY anti‐HER‐2/neu (4B5)2
c
InSite HER‐2/neu KIT (CB11)1
d
Bond Oracle Her2 IHC System (CB11)1

09/25/1998
10/20/2010*
06/08/2012**
02/22/2013***
11/28/2000
12/22/2004
04/25/2012

Sample: FFPE specimens
Methods: Antibody: 1Rabbit polyclonal, 2Rabbit monoclonal
Theranostic Test: HER2 positive patients are candidates for treatment with Herceptin®
(transtuzumab). The HercepTest is also approved for identifying breast cancer patients
eligible for Perjeta (pertuzumab),** and for Kadcyla (ado‐trastuzumabemtansine).***
Colorectal

DAKO EGFR PharmDx Kit

a

02/12/2004*
09/27/2006**

Sample: FFPE specimens
Method: Antibody: Mouse monoclonal
Theranostic Test: patients overexpressing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are
candidates for treatment with Erbitux (cetuximab)* or Vectibix (panitumumab).**
b
Colorectal
Ventana MMR IHC Panel
10/27/17
Sample: FFPE specimens
Method: Five antibody immunohistochemistry (IHC) panel: Four mouse monoclonal: anti‐
MLH1, anti‐PMS2, anti‐MSH2, anti‐BRAF V600E; one rabbit monoclonal: anti‐MSH6
Denotative Test: The panel detects mismatch repair (MMR) proteins deficiency in patients with
colorectal cancer for the identification of probable Lynch syndrome and to detect BRAF V600E
protein to differentiate between sporadic colorectal cancer and probable Lynch syndrome.

Gastric

DAKO C‐Kit PharmDx kit

a

06/27/2005

Sample: FFPE Gastro‐intestinal stromal tumors (GISTs)
Method: Antibody: Rabbit polyclonal
Denotative and Theranostic Test: c‐Kit (CD117) expression aids the differential diagnosis of
GISTs from tumors of similar histologic appearance. GIST patients may be candidates for
treatment with Gleevec (imatinib mesylate).
Suppliers:
Dako North America, Inc., Carpinteria, CA;
b
Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., Tucson, AZ;
c
Biogenex Laboratories, Inc., Freemont, CA;
d
Leica Biosystems Inc., Buffalo Grove, IL.
Notes: FFPE: formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded. * Asterisks per individual test link a test element
to date of approval. 1, 2, Superscript numbers per individual test link an antibody to its clonal status.
a

Additionally, ISH enables the detection of finer level chromosome abnormalities as
well as the visualization of DNA or RNA expression patterns in relation to cytologic
or histologic features, and is applicable to interphase (nondividing) cells [4].
The ISH assay was independently described in 1969 by Gall and Pardue [5],
and by John et al. [6]. ISH involves hybridizing a labeled nucleic acid probe
complementary to target sequences in slide‐mounted metaphase chromosome
­

128

Molecular Diagnosis

spreads, cell preps, or tissue sections (fresh/frozen or FFPE). Originally, the
­technique was performed using isotopic labels such as 32P, 35S, or 3H. In the 1980s
and 1990s, hapten labels (e.g., biotin, digoxigenin, dinitrophenol [DNP]) and fluorescent dyes were developed along with sensitive detection modalities.
Broadly, there are two categories of non‐isotopic ISH: chromogenic ISH (CISH)
and fluorescence ISH (FISH). In CISH, following hybridization, a hapten labeled
probe is detected by application of AP or HRP enzyme linked reagents (such as
antibodies) using colorimetric substrates. FISH uses probes directly labeled with a
fluorescent dye or uses fluorescently labeled detection reagents for the detection of
a hapten label. The main advantage of CISH is the ability to counterstain specimens with histochemical stains and review the data by bright‐field microscopy.
CISH stained slides are easily archived. FISH signal clinical data interpretation
requires fluorescence microscopy and digital imaging technology. Multiplex FISH
allows the detection of two or more targets using different fluorescent labels; the
multiplex limit with CISH is two probes.
As with IHC, diagnostic ISH assays frequently have detailed guidelines to ensure
standardized interpretations between observers and institutions. These rules may
include counting ISH signals in a minimum numbers of cells from different areas
within a tumor as well as counting ISH signals among normal adjacent tissues.
For clinical testing purposes, ISH probes can be classed into four categories:
chromosome enumeration probes (CEN) (that target centromeric sequences located
between the short (p) and long arms (q) of a chromosome); locus specific identifier
(LSI) probes (that localize to gene regions on the p or q arms); dual fusion LSI
probes; and break‐apart LSI probes. CEN probes allow determination of changes
in chromosome copy number. LSI probes provide data about gene amplification
events and may be used in conjunction with CEN probes to allow a comparison of
LSI gene signal counts to chromosome copy number (Figure 1). Dual fusion and
break‐apart probes are used to investigate translocation events. FDA‐listed ISH
tests are detailed in Table 2. As with IHC, there are many other CLIA/CAP established ISH tests especially in the field of clinical cytogenetics.
Figure 1. Breast cancer case study molecular diagnostics: immunohistochemistry (IHC) and chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH). All assays were applied to the same tumor. (a) Hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) stained section of the breast tumor. (b) IHC for breast cancer standard of care marker
estrogen receptor (ER): >90% of tumor cell nuclei show are stained; strong intensity on average. (c)
IHC for standard of care marker progesterone receptor (PgR): 31–40% of tumor cell nuclei are
stained; moderate intensity on average. (d) IHC for HER2 using an FDA approved IHC assay (antibody
clone 4B5 [Table 1]) ~90% tumors cells show uniform intense complete membrane staining demonstrating HER2 overexpression. (e) ISH for HER2 DNA (INFORM dual ISH probe [Table 2]). Red CISH
signals indicate signals from the centromere of chromosome 17; the black signals represent the HER2
DNA locus and are generated by the enzymatic deposition of silver atoms (silver‐enhanced ISH
[SISH]). The excess of black signals relative to red indicates HER2 DNA amplification. (f) An experimental ISH assay for HER2 RNA (RNAscope®, Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Newark, CA) showing abundant HER2 RNA expression (dot signals). (g) IHC for Ki67 (mouse monoclonal antibody MIB‐1). Ki67 is
a cell proliferation marker often used in diagnostic assessments; however, because of a lack of consensus about scoring criteria Ki67 is not recommended for routine breast IHC. (h) RNAscope ISH for
MKI67 for comparison with the protein stain. Scale bar: 20 μm. (See insert for color representation.)

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

(a)
50 μm

(c)
50 μm

(e)
25 μm

(g)
50 μm

(b)
50 μm

(d)
50 μm

(f)
25 μm

(h)
50 μm

129

130

Molecular Diagnosis

T a b l e 2. FDA approved or cleared in situ hybridization tests for cancer diagnostics.
Cancer Type

Test Name

FDA Dates

a
Vysis D7S486/CEP 7 FISH
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)/
Probe Kit
Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS)
Sample Type: Bone marrow or peripheral blood lymphocytes
Method: Dual‐color FISH (LSI 7q31 and CEP 7)
Denotative Test: Deletion of chromosome 7q and loss of a complete chromosome 7
(monosomy 7) aids AML and MDL diagnosis.

1

Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)

1

Vysis EGR1(Early growth
response protein‐1) FISH
Probe Kit

a

09/13/2013

08/29/2011

Sample Type: Bone marrow lymphocytes
Method: Dual‐color FISH (LSI 5q31 and CEP 5p15.2)
Prognostic Test: Deletion of chromosome 5q is associated with an unfavorable prognosis in
AML patients.
a
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Vysis CLL FISH Probe Kit
(CLL)
Sample Type: Peripheral blood lymphocytes
Method: Multicolor FISH (LSI TP53, ATM, 13q34 and CEP 12)
Denotative Test: Screens for p53, ATM, 11q deletions, and chromosome 12 trisomy
enabling CLL sub‐classification.

1

a
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
CEP 12 SpectrumOrange
(CLL)
Sample Type: Peripheral blood lymphocytes
Method: Mono‐color FISH (CEP 12)
Denotative Test: Chr. 12 enumeration aids CLL diagnosis.

1

Bladder

a

Breast

b

08/09/2011

01/13/1997

1
Vysis UroVysion Bladder
08/03/2001
Cancer Recurrence Kit
Sample Type: Urine specimens from persons with hematuria suspected of having bladder
cancer.
Method: Multicolor FISH (LSI 9p21 and CEP 3, 7, 17)
Denotative and Prognostic Test: The test aids initial diagnosis of bladder cancer and the
monitoring of tumor recurrence for previously diagnosed bladder cancer.

SPOT‐LIGHT HER2 CISH
Kit
c
INFORM HER2 Dual CISH/
SISH DNA Probe
d
HER2 CISH PharmDxTM Kit
a
PATHVYSION HER‐2 DNA
Probe FISH Kit
d
HER2 FISH PharmDx Kit

07/01/2008

2

06/14/2011

2

11/30/2011
12/11/1998

2
2

05/03/2005
10/20/2010*

2
2

Sample Type: FFPE specimens
Method: “Spot‐Light” mono‐color CISH; Others dual color FISH of CISH (LSI HER2
[17p12] and CEP 17)
Theranostic Test: HER2 amplification indicates patient eligibility for treatment with
Herpceptin (Trastuzumab). *Also approved for use on metastatic gastric and gastro‐
esophageal junction adenocarcinomas.

131

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

T a b l e 2. (Continued)
Cancer Type

Test Name

Breast

d

Dako TOP2A FISH
PharmDx Kit

FDA Dates
2

01/11/2008

Sample Type: FFPE surgical specimens
Method: Dual‐color FISH (LSI TOP2A [17q21.2] and CEP 17)
Prognostic and Theranostic Test: Topoisomerase 2 alpha (TOP2A) amplification is
associated with elevated risk of recurrence or decreased long term survival; patients may
be treated by TOP2A inhibitor anthracycline therapies (Doxorubicin, Epirubicin).
Myeloid Disorders

CEP 8 SpectrumOrange
DNA FISH Probe Kit

a

1

11/29/1996

Sample Type: Bone marrow specimens
Method: Monocolor FISH (CEP 8)
Denotative Test: Trisomy 8 is common in: chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), Myeloproliferative disorder (MPD), myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), hematological disorders not otherwise specified (HDNOS).
Non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)

a

Vysis ALK Break Apart
FISH Probe Kit

2

08/26/2011

Sample Type: FFPE tissue
Method: Dual–color FISH (LSI 2p23, break apart probes)
Theranostic Test: Utilizes two LSI probes to screen for ALK translocation events. Patients
with the rearrangement may be eligible for treatment with Xalkori (Crizotinib).
Suppliers:
Abbott Molecular, Inc., Des Plaines, IL;
b
Life Technologies, Inc., Grand Island, NY;
c
Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., Tucson, AZ;
d
Dako North America, Inc., Carpinteria, CA.
Notes: FFPE: formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded. FDA: 1510(k); 2PMA. LSI: locus specific
identifier; CEP: chromosome enumeration probe.
a

Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
PCR is an in vitro method for the amplification of DNA [7]. Kary Mullis was
awarded the Noble Prize for Chemistry in 1993 for developing the technique in the
early 1980s. The procedure involves heat denaturation of specimen DNA into
­single strand fragments. Oligonucleotide DNA primers designed to be complementary to sequences upstream and downstream of a genomic region of interest
anneal to the denatured DNA forming double stranded hybrids; this initiates DNA
synthesis (extension) by the enzyme DNA polymerase. The assay uses a thermostable DNA polymerase that maintains activity despite repeated heating to >95 °C
during denaturation. These enzymes are extractable from microorganisms that live
in thermal springs or hydrothermal vents in the ocean bed. The most commonly
used enzyme is Taq DNA polymerase extracted from the bacterium Thermus
aquaticus. Denaturation, annealing and extension steps constitute one cycle of
PCR. Automated PCR cycles result in the targeted exponential amplification of the

132

Molecular Diagnosis

DNA of interest. Theoretically, after 30 cycles more than one billion amplicon
­copies (230) of a target sequence will be generated accounting for PCR sensitivity.
End‐point PCR (first generation PCR) consists in performing 30–50 cycles of
amplification followed by analytical tests on the PCR product. In real‐time quantitative PCR (QPCR [second generation PCR]), the accumulation of fluorescently
labeled PCR amplicons is continuously monitored at each cycle of PCR. Different
colored fluorescent dyes may be used to enable multiplex assays that simultaneously assess different targets within the same PCR. QPCR allows the quantitation
of a sample target by reference to a standard curve generated from known quantities of the target. The simplest form of QPCR utilizes a fluorescent dye (e.g.,
SYBR® Green) that binds to double stranded DNA. Other approaches use amplicon‐
specific probes labeled with a fluorescent marker. There are several varieties of
probes including TaqMan, Molecular Beacons, and Scorpions.
Digital PCR (dPCR) (third generation PCR) assays a single tube 20 μl reaction
partitioned by emulsification into 20 000 1 nl droplets; each represents a unique PCR
and involves a fluorescent TaqMan probe. After ~40 cycles of PCR, droplets are
­analyzed one‐by‐one for the detection of amplicon‐generated fluorescence. The test
has the highest sensitivity of any PCR assay. dPCR allows direct target quantification
by Poisson distribution analyses and does not require a standard reference curve.
Reverse transcription PCR (RT‐PCR) allows the investigation of RNA expression by first, second, or third generation PCR. RNA extract is converted to complementary DNA (cDNA) by reverse transcriptase (RT) and the DNA can then be used
for PCR procedures.
Amplification‐refractory mutation system (ARMS) PCR, also known as allele‐
specific PCR (ASPCR) is used for detecting single base changes/mutations in a
target sequence. PCR will only proceed when the 3′‐terminal base in an primer
anneals with its target (i.e., A : T or C : G). By the judicious use of primers to detect
wild type or mutated sequences the presence of a mutation or other sequence of
specific interest may be inferred.
Epigenetic changes can also be investigated by PCR. Pretreating DNA extract
with bisulfite converts cytosine residues into uracil whereas methylated cytosine is
unconverted. When the DNA is subjected to PCR, uracil residues are converted to
thymidine ones; i.e., the net result is a C to T conversion in the PCR generated
amplicons. This DNA base change can be detected by sequencing or restriction
enzyme analyses. Altered methylation state is associated with gene expression
deregulation and is used as a diagnostic maker (Table 4).
Immuno‐PCR utilizes an antibody to detect a protein target in solution. The
antibody is directly labeled with an oligonucleotide sequence. Real time PCR is
used to detect PCR amplicons amplified from the oligonucleotide sequences. The
test was developed as a more sensitive alternative to the in vitro enzyme‐linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In ELISA, enzyme conjugated antibody is used to
screen for its target immobilized in a microtitre plate; the enzyme is detected using
a colorimetric or chemiluminescent substrate.
There are far more variations and clinical applications of the PCR technique
than can be accounted for in this chapter. There are also varieties of “do‐it‐all”

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

133

automated platforms that perform nucleic acids extractions and incorporate PCR
techniques (e.g., ARMS) for high throughput multi‐analytic research or diagnostic
tests. These include the AutoGenomics INFINITY® System (Carlsbad, CA) and
the Luminex xMAP® Technology (Austin, TX) that can screen up to 240 or 500
different biomarkers per specimen respectively.
Whereas IHC and ISH frequently rely upon qualitative judgments by expert
observers, PCR data is more quantitative. Nevertheless there are detailed recommendations for the standardization of PCR, such as the MIQE guidelines [8].
FDA listed PCR‐based tests are shown in Table 3. Although not FDA listed, the
Oncotype DX® test (Genomic Health® Inc., Redwood City, CA) is approved by the
NCCN and by ASCO and as a multigene assay typifies contemporary molecular
diagnostic approaches. The test is a RT‐QPCR assay for 21 genes (16 cancer and 5
reference) and is recommended for node‐negative, ER‐positive, HER2‐negative
invasive breast tumors <1.0 cm in size. Based on gene expression levels, a breast
cancer recurrence score is calculated to stratify patients into those requiring hormone therapy versus those who need more aggressive chemotherapy. Other
ACSCO‐approved breast cancer QRT‐PCR tests include the EndoPredict® test
(Sividon Diagnostics GmbH, Cologne, Germany) and the Breast Cancer Index test
(Biotheranostics, Inc., San Diego, CA) that both screen for 12 genes and have
­similar applications as the Oncotype DX test.
Sequencing Technologies
Sanger Sequencing: Nucleic acid sequencing was developed in the mid‐1970s by
Frederic Sanger who was awarded the Noble Prize for Chemistry for his discovery
in 1980. A basic reaction involves a DNA sample, a sequence specific DNA oligonucleotide primer, DNA polymerase enzyme, the four DNA deoxynucleotide
triphosphates (dNTPs) building blocks (dNTPs, i.e., deoxyadenosine triphosphate
[dATP], deoxythymidine triphosphate [dTTP], deoxycytidine triphosphate [dCTP],
deoxyguanosine triphosphate [dGTP]) and one of four corresponding dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The incorporation of a ddNTP into a DNA ­molecule prevents
further extension of the sequence by the DNA polymerase. The assay originally
used isotopically labeled ddNTPs and required four separate individual reactions
run in parallel (i.e., each with a different labeled ddNTP). Sequencing reaction data
were assessed by autoradiography following polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Dye Terminator Sequencing: The Sanger method was adapted so that each ddNTP
is labeled with a different fluorescent dye allowing a one tube reaction. Additionally,
PCR was incorporated to improve reaction efficiency. The generated fragments are
sieved by capillary gel electrophoresis. DdNTP fluorophore emissions are detected
as the fragments pass through the gel revealing the color‐coded base sequence order
and are assembled into a linear sequence by dedicated ­software data analyses.
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) also called Massively Parallel Sequencing
(MPS) refers to non‐Sanger sequencing modalities conceived and developed in the
1990s/early 2000s that allow high‐throughput sequencing analyses of millions of

134

Molecular Diagnosis

T a b l e 3. FDA approved or cleared PCR‐based tests for cancer diagnostics.
Cancer Type

Test Name

FDA Dates

GeneSearch Breast Lymph
07/16/2007
Node (BLN) Test Kit
Sample Type: Lymph node biopsy excision, fresh tissue
Method: Real‐Time Reverse Transcription PCR
Denotative and Patient Management Test: Rapid detection test for >0. 2 mm metastases in
sentinel lymph node biopsies. Test results assist the intra‐ or postoperative decision to
remove additional tissue. The expression of mammaglobin (MG) and cytokeratin 19
(CK19) is measured. Marker detection at or below a clinical sensitivity threshold indicates
metastases.
Breast

a

Cervical Cytology

b

COBAS Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) Test

04/19/2011

Sample Type: Cervical cytology DNA
Method: Real Time PCR
Patient Management Test: Screens for high‐risk HPV (HR‐HPV) infections in low‐grade
abnormal cervical cytology. HR HPV negative patients may be excluded from biopsy test
referral.
Colorectal (CRC)

c

therascreen KRAS RGQ PCR
Kit

07/06/2012

Sample Type: FFPE CRC tissue
Method: Amplification Refractory Mutation System/Scorpions Real‐Time PCR (ARMS/S
PCR)
Theranostic Test: Detects seven somatic mutations in the KRAS oncogene. CRC patients
without mutations are candidates for treatment with Erbitux (cetuximab) or Vectibix
(panitumumab).
d
Colorectal (CRC)
Cologuard
08/11/2014
Sample Type: Stool sample
Methods: QPCR, bisulfite conversion, Enzyme‐Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
Patient Management Test: For adults >50 years; screens for 7 KRAS mutations, methylation of
NDRG4 and BMP3, hemoglobin. A composite score is generated from the data. A positive
result suggests CRC and referral for diagnostic colonoscopy.
e
Melanoma
THxID™ BRAF Kit
05/29/2013
Sample Type: FFPE melanoma tissue
Method: Real‐Time PCR for BRAF V600E / V600K somatic mutations
Theranostic Test: Patients with BRAF V600E mutation may be treated with Dabrafenib
[tafinlar]; patients with BRAF V600E or V600K with Trametinib [mekinist].

Melanoma

COBAS 4800 BRAF V600
Mutation Test

b

8/17/2011

Sample Type: FFPE melanoma tissue
Method: Real‐Time PCR
Theranostic Test: Aids identification of V600E mutation positive patients for treatment with
Vemurafenib.
Non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)

c

therascreen EGFR RGQ PCR
Kit

07/12/2013

Sample Type: FFPE NSCLC tissue
Method: Amplification Refractory Mutation System/Scorpions Real‐Time PCR (ARMS/S
PCR)

135

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

T a b l e 3. (Continued)
Cancer Type

Test Name

FDA Dates

Theranostic Test: Detects exon 19 deletions and exon 21 substitution mutations of the
epidermal growth factor receptor gene to select patients for Gilotrif (afatinib) treatment.
b
Non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
COBAS EGFR Mutation Test
05/14/2013
Sample Type: FFPE NSCLC tissue
Method: Real‐Time PCR
Theranostic Test: Detects of EGFR gene exon 19 deletions and exon 21 (l858r) substitution
mutations to select patients with metastatic NSCLC for whom Tarceva (erlotinib) is indicated.
f
Ovarian
BRACAnalysis CDx
12/19/2014
Sample Type: Whole blood specimen genomic DNA extract
Method: PCR, Multiplex PCR, Sanger Sequencing
Theranostic Test: Screens for variants in the protein coding regions and intron/exon boundaries
of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes; also detects single nucleotide variants and small insertions
and deletions (indels) and large deletions and duplications. Test results identifying patients
with germline BRCA variants eligible for treatment with Lynparza (olaparib).

Prostate

g

NADiA ProsVue

1

09/20/2011

Sample Type: Blood serum DNA
Method: Quantitative, Immuno‐PCR
Prognostic Test: Measures the rate of change of serum total prostate specific antigen (PSA)
over a period of time to identify patients at reduced prostate cancer recurrence risk for an
eight year period following prostatectomy.
Suppliers:
a
Janssen Diagnostics, Inc., Raritan, NJ;
b
Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., Pleasanton, CA;
c
Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA;
d
Exact Sciencses Corporation, Madison, WI;
e
bioMérieux Inc., Durham, NC;
f
Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT;
g
Iris Molecular Diagnostics, Chatsworth, CA.
Note: All assays have FDA PMA status, except 1510(k). FFPE: formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded.

sequences. These proprietary automated technologies include Solexa sequencing
(Illumina), pyrosequencing (Roche 454, Qiagen), Ion torrent (Life Technologies),
and SOLiD sequencing (Applied Biosystems). Dedicated software data analyses
are required.
Sanger/dye terminator sequencing has been widely used in conjunction with
PCR/RT‐PCR to identify the presence of a mutation, single nucleotide
­polymorphism (SNP), translocation/chimeric transcript events, or other genomic
rearrangements (Table 3). NGS has been developed for numerous cancer research
applications including genotyping (for structural changes through to SNP changes),
aneuploidy and copy number variation (CNV) analysis, transcriptome sequencing
(RNA‐Seq), small noncoding RNA and microRNA sequencing, viral and microbial sequencing, through to the entire genome or exome sequencing. Presently,
diagnostic NGS applications are largely theranostic and for targeted panels of
genes associated with actionable pharmacologic agents [9] (Table 4).

T a b l e 4. Other molecular tests FDA approved or cleared for cancer diagnostics.
Cancer Type

Test Name

Breast

a

Agendia MammaPrint

FDA Date
06/22/2007*
02/10/2015**

1
1

Sample Type: RNA extract from fresh‐frozen* or FFPE tissues**
Method: Microarray
Prognostic Test: Expression profiling of 70 genes to assess risk for distant metastasis (up to
10 years for patients <61 years old, up to 5 years for ≥61 years). The test is for Stage I or II
breast tumors ≤5.0 cm size and lymph node negative.
b
1
Metastatic Cancer of
Tissue of Origin Test
07/30/2008*
1
Unknown Origin
06/08/2010**
Sample Type: RNA extract from fresh‐frozen* or FFPE** tissues
Method: Microarray
Denotative Test: Quantifies the similarity of tumor specimens of unknown primary to 15
cancer types representing 60 morphologies by measuring the degree of similarity between
the RNA expression pattern in a patient’s tumor and the RNA expression patterns in a
database of tumor samples diagnosed according to current clinical and pathological
practice. This microarray based test assesses the expression of ~2000 genes.

Breast

c

Breast, Ovarian, Prostate

c

Prosigna™ Breast Cancer
09/06/2013
Prognostic Gene Signature Assay
Sample Type: RNA extracted from FFPE specimens
Method: NanoString technology
Prognostic Test: Predicts distant recurrence‐free survival at 10 years in postmenopausal,
hormone receptor positive, Stage I or II breast cancer, 0–3 positive lymph nodes and treated
with adjuvant endocrine therapy alone. RNA expression levels of 50 genes generate a risk
of recurrence score.
23andMe Personal Genome Service
Genetic Health Risk Report for
BRCA1/BRCA2 (Selected Variants)

03/06/2018

2

Sample Type: Patient saliva
Method: Illumina BeadArray microarray technology assay of 185delAg and 5382insC
variants in the BRCA1 gene and 6174delT variant in the BRCA2 gene.
Personal Genome Information Test: The three gene variants detected are most common in
people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent and do not represent the majority of BRCA1/BRCA2
variants in the general population. Consumers consult with a qualified healthcare provider
subsequent to test results.
Cervical Cytology
Abnormalities

2
digene HC2 HR HPV DNA Test
03/31/2003
2
Cervista HR HPV and 16/18 Tests
03/12/2009
e
2
Aptima *HR HPV RNA and **HPV
10/28/2011*
2
16 18/45 RNA Genotype Assay
10/12/2012**
Sample Type: Cervical cytology RNA (Aptima) or DNA (Cervista, HC2)
Methods: HC2 – Hybrid Capture; Cervista – Invader chemistry; Aptima – Transcription
Mediated Amplification (TMA)
Patient Management Tests: These assays screen for high‐risk human papillomavirus (HR‐HPV)
infections in low‐grade abnormal cervical cytology. HR HPV negative patients may be
excluded from biopsy test referral.
d
e

f
3
Non‐Small Cell Lung
Oncomine Dx Target Test
06/23/2017
Cancer
Sample Type: DNA and RNA isolated from FFPE tumor samples
Methods: High throughput, parallel‐sequencing technology (next generation sequencing) for
qualitative detection of single nucleotide variants and deletions in 23 genes from DNA, and
fusions in ROS1 from RNA.

136

T a b l e 4. (Continued)
Cancer Type

Test Name

FDA Date

Theranostic Test: The test aids in selecting non‐small cell lung cancer patients for treatment
with targeted therapies according to test data.
g
3
Ovarian Cancer
FoundationFocus CDxBRCA
12/19/2016
Sample Type: FFPE ovarian tumor tissue
Methods: Next generation sequencing based in vitro diagnostic device for qualitative detection
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene sequence alterations in ovarian tumor tissue.
Theranostic Test: the assay identifies patients who may be eligible for treatment with Rubraca
(rucaparib).
e
2
Prostate Cancer
Progensa™ PCA3 Assay
02/13/2012
Sample Type: RNA extract from urine sample cells
Method: TMA
Patient Management Test: The test is for men ≥50 years who have had one or more previous
negative prostate biopsies and for whom a further biopsy would be recommended based on
current standard of care. The assay measures the concentration of prostate cancer gene 3
(PCA3) and prostate‐specific antigen (PSA) RNA molecules and calculates the ratio (PCA3
score). A low score is associated with a decreased likelihood of a positive biopsy obviating
the need for another biopsy.
f
1
Metastatic breast, colorectal
CELLSEARCH® Circulating Tumor
11/20/2007
or prostate
Cell (CTC) Test
Sample Type: Blood from metastatic cancer patients
Method: Circulating ell capture
Prognostic Test: Circulating cells expressing EpCAM (epithelial cell adhesion molecule) are
captured by antibody coated magnetic “nanoparticles.” This epithelial cell enriched sample
is then incubated with a fluorescent cell nuclear dye, and fluorescently labeled monoclonal
antibodies for epithelial cell specific cytokeratins (CK 8, 18, & 19) and with CD45 that is
specific for leukocytes. CTCs are defined as nucleated cells lacking CD45 and expressing
cytokeratin. CTC detection is associated with decreased progression free survival and
decreased overall survival for metastatic cancer patients.

Tumor Profiling

MSK‐IMPACT (Integrated
Mutation Profiling Of Actionable
Cancer Targets):A Hybridization‐
Capture Based Next Generation
Sequencing Assay

j

11/15/2017

2

Sample Type: FFPE tumor and normal tissue samples
Method: Next generation sequencing; detects somatic alterations (point mutations, small
insertions, deletions, microsatellite instability) in a wide range of tumor specimens using a
468 gene panel.
Multipurpose Test: Mutations are reported as “cancer mutations with evidence of clinical
significance” or “cancer mutations with potential clinical significance”; particular findings
are used to guide diagnosis and treatment plans.
Suppliers:
a
Agendia Inc., USA, Irvine, CA;
b
Cancer Genetics, Inc., Rutherford, NJ;
c
23andMe, Inc., Mountain View, CA;
d
Qiagen Inc. Valencia, CA;
e
Hologic Inc., Bedford, MA;
f
Life Technologies Corporation, Carlsbad, CA;
g
Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA;
h
Menarini Silicon Biosystems, Inc., Huntington Valley, PA; iCancer Genetics, Inc., Rutherford, NJ;
j
Memorial Sloan‐Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
Notes FDA: 1510(k); 2513(f)(2)de novo; 3PMA. *Asterisks per individual test link a test element to
date of approval. FFPE: formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded.

138

Molecular Diagnosis

Microarray Assay
Microarray technology was developed in the early 1990s. A microarray chip consists of a silicon‐based solid support spotted with covalently bound single‐strand
DNA oligonucleotide probes complementary to gene or other genomic sequences
of interest. Current technology enables the investigation of the entire human exome
by way of hundreds of thousands of probes imprinted onto a microarray chip.
Microarrays for cancer diagnostics consist of limited panels of markers addressing
specific clinical issues [10].
Microarrays are most widely utilized for gene expression profiling. The assay
involves extracting RNA from a tumor sample and normal companion tissue and
converting these preparations to cDNA using RT. Fresh‐frozen tissue specimens
were originally preferred but assays have now been adapted to work well FFPE
specimens’ RNA extract despite the degraded quality of the RNA recovered. If the
amount of cDNA generated is limiting, PCR amplification of the cDNA may be
performed prior to the microarray assay. The two cDNA preparations are each
labeled with a different fluorescent dye. These are then hybridized to the microarray. Analysis of the fluorescence data shows which mRNAs are up‐ or down‐­
regulated in the tumor sample relative to the normal: oligonucleotide probe spots
that fluoresce with the color of the tumor cDNA indicate overexpression in the
tumor and vice versa; coequal tumor‐normal expression levels show a blended
coloration. Automated generation of the fluorescent intensities is the basis of data
interpretation.
There are three FDA‐listed microarray based assays (Table 4). The Agendia
MammaPrint® (Agendia Inc. USA, Irvine, CA) interrogates the expression levels
of 70 genes to calculate risk of recurrence (ROR) and thereby the appropriateness
of hormone or chemotherapy for a patient. The Tissue of Origin Test (Cancer
Genetics Inc., Rutherford, NJ) compares the mRNA expression levels of a metastatic tumor of uncertain anatomic origin against the expression levels of known
mRNA expression signatures for 15 different organs by assessing 2000 different
genes. More than 85 000 newly diagnosed metastatic cancers in the United States
have an unclear diagnosis. Knowledge of the primary tumor anatomic location is
significant for treatment selection for metastatic cancer patients. Tissue of origin
can also be assessed by IHC using antibody marker panels. A personal genome
information test developed by 23andMe (Mountain View, CA) provides limited
information about BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations that may be associated with an
increased risk for breast, ovarian or prostate cancer; consultation with a healthcare
provider is required for test interpretation.
Transcription Mediated Amplification (TMA)
Developed in the 1990s, TMA (HOLOGIC®, Bedford, MA) is a method that like
PCR amplifies target sequences; unlike PCR the TMA reaction is isothermal and
generates RNA rather than DNA amplicons [11]. Clinical TMA assays utilize

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

139

RNA extracted from a patient specimen. The TMA amplification reaction includes
two enzymes: a RT enzyme that also has RNase H activity, and RNA polymerase.
Similar to PCR the assay utilizes two oligonucleotide primers; however, in TMA
one primer incorporates an RNA polymerase promoter site into the amplicons; the
promoter causes multiple RNA copies to be generated. Exponential amplification
ensues generating a billion‐fold amplification within a ~30 minute reaction. Finally,
RNA amplicons are detected by hybridization to a labeled DNA probe for either a
chemiluminescence or fluorescence detection assay.
Table 4 shows TMA diagnostic applications. These include the detection of
high‐risk type human papillomavirus (HPV) E6/E7 RNA in cervical cytology
­samples for the identification of patients requiring a biopsy referral, and a urine
cytology test for PCA3 for selecting patients who may need a prostate biopsy.
Invader Chemistry
Invader® chemistry (HOLOGIC, Bedford, MA) also developed in the 1990s is a
proprietary technique for the detection of single‐base changes, insertions, deletions, and changes in gene and chromosome number. Unlike PCR or TMA the
assay does not generate multiple copies of the target, instead, Invader chemistry
works by generating an amplified signal cascade from a detected target [12]. The
method involves two simultaneous isothermal reactions; one reaction detects the
DNA target of interest and a second reaction generates an amplified signal. A
standard 4‐hour reaction produces more than 10 million‐fold signals per target
sequence. The technology can be adapted for combined use with pre‐PCR
(InvaderPLUS) for even greater detection sensitivity.
The Cervista HPV assay (Table 4) is used in the management of patients with
cervical cytologic abnormalities. There is also a theranostic Invader assay for metastatic colorectal cancer patients. These patients are candidates for treatment with
the chemotherapeutic drug irinotecan. Uridine diphosphate glucoronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) is an enzyme found in the liver that normally inactivates
irinotecan limiting its toxic effects upon the patient. However, patients with certain
variant sequences of UGT1A1 have lowered enzyme activity putting them at risk
of severe toxic side effects; these patients need to be treated at lower doses of
­irinotecan. The Invader UGT1A1 Molecular Assay identifies patients with the
­variant sequences that are contraindications for standard irinotecan treatment.
NanoString Technology
NanoString technology (NanoString® Technologies, Seattle, WA) is an adaptation
of microarray principles and is used for RNA expression analyses. The technique
was established in the 2000s. Total RNA (extracted from >10 000 cells) is mixed
with two DNA oligonucleotide probes: a 3′‐biotin end labeled target‐specific
­capture probe, and a target‐specific reporter probe labeled at the 5′ ‐ end with a

140

Molecular Diagnosis

series of differently colored fluorescent tags; the tag color order acts as a “bar
code” target‐specific identifier of the sequence detected by the probe. If the target
sequence is present in the RNA extract, both probes will hybridize. The tripartite
probes/target complex is purified and then passed across a NanoString cartridge
coated with streptavidin. Streptavidin has a high affinity for biotin and immobilizes hybrid targets. A voltage is applied across the cartridge and causes the
­negatively charged nucleic acid hybrids to linearize over the cartridge surface.
The detected fluorescent tag codes allow quantification of gene target expression
in the sample. The assay is highly multiplexable and can screen for the detection of
up to 800 targets. Unlike PCR, TMA, or Invader, the assay includes no target or
signal amplification steps yet is sensitive enough to detect single copy gene expression. However, if specimen is limiting (<10 000 cells) the assay can be combined
with pre‐PCR steps.
The Prosigna™ NanoString assay is FDA‐cleared (Table 4) for breast cancer
10 year risk of distant recurrence (ROR) testing. The test screens for the PAM50
(Prediction Analysis of Microarray 50) gene set that assesses patient specimens on
the basis of the expression levels of 50 different genes into the four main molecular
subtypes of breast cancer (Luminal A, Luminal B, HER2‐enriched, and Basal‐
like). On the basis of PAM50 data a 10‐year ROR score (0–100) is generated [13].
Hybrid Capture
In this test developed in the 1990s, patient DNA extract is screened for a target by
hybridization assay with a sequence‐specific RNA probe. RNA/DNA hybrids are
“captured” in microwell plates coated with antibodies specific for RNA/DNA
hybrids. Following well plate immobilization, AP labeled anti‐RNA/DNA antibodies are added and enzyme activity is demonstrated using a chemiluminescnt substrate. The assay is FDA‐approved for cervical cytologic HPV testing [14] (Table 4).
Flow Cytometry and Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC) Detection
Flow cytometry science dates back to the 1950s. The technique involves the assay
of fluid suspensions of single cells simultaneously for their intrinsic light scattering properties and for one or more extrinsic properties using fluorescent probes;
for example, antibody probes for the detection of specific proteins [15]. Clinically,
flow cytometry is used in the diagnosis of hematological malignancies, such as for
distinguishing acute myeloid leukemia (AML) from acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL). ALL and AML have similar features but require different treatments. The
different immunophenotypes of these conditions can be discerned by flow
­cytometric cell sorting using antibody panels. Non‐Hodgkin lymphoma and other
lymphoproliferative disorders can also be diagnosed by immunophenotyping.
Flow cytometry is also used to measure minimal residual disease in leukemia
patients in remission [15].

Molecular Techniques an d Their Applications

141

Tumor signatures are detectable in the blood by way of cells shed into the vascular from primary or metastatic cancers. The FDA cleared CellSearch® system
(Menarini Silicon Biosystems, Inc., Huntington Valley, PA) developed in the 2000s
(Table 4) is an adaptation of flow cytometry for the detection of rare CTCs.
Circulating cells expressing EpCAM (epithelial cell adhesion molecule) are captured by antibody coated magnetic “nanoparticles.” This epithelial cell enriched
sample is then incubated with three differently colored fluorescent markers: a cell
nuclear dye; monoclonal antibodies for three cytokeratins (CK 8, 18, and 19 that
are epithelial specific); and CD45 (specific for leukocytes). CTCs are defined as
nucleated cells lacking CD45 and expressing cytokeratin. The detection of CTCs
is associated with decreased progression free survival and decreased overall
­survival for patients with metastatic cancer [16].
Clinical Proteomics and Genomics by Mass Spectrometry
The entire complement of proteins expressed by a cellular system is known as the
proteome. The human genome is estimated to comprise up to ~25 000 protein
encoding genes; these may generate more than 250 000 (even as many as 1 million)
different protein forms [17]. Clinical proteomics is concerned with the investigation of pathognomonic proteomic signatures detectable from patient tissues or
body fluid. Currently, the main technologies available for clinical proteomic
­applications are protein microarrays and mass spectrometry (MS) [17].
Protein microarrays were first envisaged in the 1980s. Whereas DNA microarrays are imprinted with oligonucleotide sequences, the capture features of protein
microarrays may be antibodies, antigens, aptamers (engineered nucleic acid oligonucleotides or peptides that will bind protein targets), or affibodies (engineered
proteins that act like antibodies). Patient protein lysate is reacted with the capture
features (typically 1000 to >10 000 per array). Captured proteins are detected by
the application of secondary elements labeled with fluorescent dyes. Protein
microarrays are currently primarily used in research applications to validate
­candidate protein biomarker relationship to a disease.
MS allows the sensitive and specific detection and quantification of proteins by
measuring the mass‐to‐charge ratio of individual charged molecules following
enzymatic fragmentation of a protein extract into peptide units. Clinically, the most
widely used MA approach is Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption‐Time of Flight
(MALDI‐TOF) that was developed in the late 1980s. The peptide sample is immobilized within a UV‐light absorbing matrix compound and ionized by a UV laser
pulse (337 nm) inside a MS instrument chamber; the charged molecules are then
mobilized by an electric field and the “time‐of‐flight” to reach a detector is measured. These data allow “peptide mass fingerprinting” of a protein; this fingerprint
is dependent on the original protein sequence. The fingerprint generated by a
MALDI‐TOF assay is evaluated by a software program that performs a virtual
enzymatic digestion of all proteins in a database and calculates what a mass

142

Molecular Diagnosis

s­ pectrum may look like for those proteins. The software then performs a “best fit”
assessment comparison of the test sample against the virtual data to identify the
protein under investigation.
The VITEK MS system (bioMériuex, Inc., Durham, NC) is an automated
MALDI‐TOF instrument that is FDA 510(k) cleared for the rapid accurate identification of up to 193 microorganisms (bacteria and fungi including mycobacteria,
Nocardia and molds) cultured from a patient sample. Patients who are immuno‐
suppressed for reasons such as organ or bone marrow transplant, or cancer therapies
are at an especially increased risk for life‐threatening infections requiring immediate treatment.
The VeriStrat® test (Biodesix, Boulder, CO) is a MALDI‐TOF assay for estimating survival outcomes for patients with advanced non‐small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC); more specifically, for patients who have progressed after or are ineligible
for platinum‐based therapy and who have wild type (or unknown) epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene status. The assay is applied to serum samples
and detects isoforms of inflammatory proteins that correlate with survival. Patient
outcomes are rated as “Good” (candidates for treatment by platinum doublet or
single‐agent therapies [EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors]) or “Poor” (recommended
for single agent chemotherapies).
The MassARRAY® System (Agena Bioscience, Inc., San Diego CA) is an adaptation of MALDI‐TOF MS for the detection of nucleic acids. The system has been
developed as a high‐throughput alternative to NGS for screening targeted gene
panels for mutation, methylation, gene transcript, or copy number status.
Experiments are designed and performed using dedicated software and reagents.
DNA or RNA is extracted from a patient sample and amplified by PCR or RT‐PCR
respectively. The amplicons are extended with Agena system‐specific primers that
confer mass identification. The final extension product is mixed with an absorption
matrix and loaded onto a multi‐sample chip platform and placed within a MS
chamber. Ionized product is detected and identified by software comparison evaluation. For cancer diagnostics, oncology panels for multiple actionable (theranostic)
cancer genes are used for research and in CAP/CLIA‐approved diagnostic labs.
Precision Diagnostics and Overdiagnosis
Precision medicine (also referred to as personalized medicine or individualized
medicine) has been defined by the National Cancer Institute as a form of medicine
that uses information about a person’s genes, proteins, and environment to prevent,
diagnose, and treat disease and alleviate symptoms [18]. Precision medicine is a
standard of care goal for modern medical practice with the aims of ensuring that
the right therapy is provided to the right patient at the right time and in the right
measure as well as leading to the discovery of new targets for cancer treatment and
prevention [18, 19]. Included in these aims is the prevention of overdiagnosis,
which is defined as diagnosis of a disease that will cause neither symptoms nor

Re ferences

143

death during the lifetime of an individual, or, as detection of disease by screening
that in the absence of screening would not have been diagnosed within the lifetime
of the patient [20].
The possibility of precision diagnostics has arisen largely because of the
improved understanding of cancer and other diseases that has emerged from the
human genome project, together with the technological advances in molecular
techniques that have allowed standardized, high‐throughput, and affordable clinical laboratory testing. These techniques are increasingly supporting improved
patient care (Tables 1–4). A greatly increased expansion in the range and scope and
inter‐combination of these modalities is expected further to continuing genomic
and proteomic research as well as investigations into the human epigenome [21]
and human microbiome [22].

References
1. College of American Pathologists. Cancer Protocols. https://www.cap.org/protocols-andguidelines (Accessed February 14, 2019).
2. Taylor, C.R. and Shi, S.‐R. (2014). Techniques of immunohistochemistry: principles, pitfalls,
and standardization. In: Diagnostic Immunohistochemistry: Theranostic and Genomic
Applications, 4e (ed. D.J. Dabs), 1–38. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders.
3. Cuzick, J., Dowsett, M., Pineda, S. et al. (2011). Prognostic value of a combined estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, Ki‐67, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 immunohistochemical score and comparison with genomic health recurrence score in early breast cancer.
J. Clin. Oncol. 29 (32): 4273–4278.
4. Lloyd, R.V., Qian, X., and Jin, L. (2009). Bright‐field In Situ hybridization. In: Cell and Tissue
Based Molecular Pathology, 1e (ed. R.R. Tubbs and M.H. Stoler), 114–126. Philadelphia, PA:
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier.
5. Gall, J.G. and Pardue, M.L. (1969). Formation and detection of RNA‐DNA hybrid molecules in
cytological preparations. Proc. Natl. Acad. SCi. USA. 63 (2): 378–383.
6. John, H.A., Birnstiel, M.L., and Jones, K.W. (1969). RNA‐DNA hybrids at the cytological level.
Nature. 223 (5206): 582–587.
7. McPherson, M.J. and Møller, S.G. (2006). Understanding PCR. In: PCR (The Basics), 2e (ed.
M.J. McPherson and S.G. Møller), 9–22. NY: Taylor & Francis Group. New York.
8. Bustin, S.A., Benes, V., Garson, J.A. et al. (2009). The MIQE guidelines: minimum information
for publication of quantitative real‐time PCR experiments. Clin Chem. 55 (4): 611–622.
9. Chang, F. and Marilyn, M.L. (2013). Clinical application of amplicon‐based next generation
sequencing in cancer. Cancer Genet. 206 (12): 413–419.
10. Ross, J.S., Hatzis, C., Symmans, W.F. et al. (2008). Commercialized multigene predictors of
clinical outcome for breast cancer. Oncologist 13 (5): 477–493.
11. Hessels, D. and Schalken, J.A. (2008). The use of PCA3 in the diagnosis of prostate cancer. Nat.
Rev. Urol. 6 (5): 255–261.
12. Wong, A.K., Chan, R.C.‐K., Stephen Nichols, W. et al. (2008). Human papillomavirus (HPV) in
atypical squamous cervical cytology: the Invader HPV test as a new screening assay. J. Clin.
Micro. 46 (3): 869–875.
13. Dowsett, M., Sestak, I., Lopez‐Knowles, E. et al. (2013). Comparison of PAM50 risk of recurrence score with oncotype DX and IHC4 for predicting risk of distant recurrence after endocrine
therapy. J. Clin. Oncol. 31 (22): 2783–2790.

144

Molecular Diagnosis

14. Moor, K.N. and Walker, J.L. (2004). High risk human papillomavirus testing: guidelines for use
in screening, triage, and follow‐up for the prevention an early detection of cervical cancer. J.
Natl. Compr. Canc. Netw. 2 (6): 589–596.
15. DiGiuseppe, J.A. (2006). Flow cytometry. In: Molecular Diagnostics For the Clinical
Laboratorian, 2e (ed. W.B. Coleman and G.J. Tsongalis), 163–172. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
16. Beije, N., Jager, A., and Sleijfer, S. (2015). Circulating tumor cell enumeration by the CellSearch
system: the clinician’s guide to breast cancer treatment? Cancer Treat. Rev. 41 (2): 144–150.
17. Office of Cancer Clinical Proteomics Research. Cancer proteomics and proteogenomics. http://
proteomics.cancer.gov (Accessed February 14, 2019)
18. National Cancer Institute. Precision medicine initiative and cancer research. http://www.
cancer.gov/news-events/cancer-currents-blog/2015/precision-medicine-initiative-2016
(Accessed February 14, 2019).
19. Mayo Clinic. Center for Individualized Medicine. http://mayoresearch.mayo.edu/center-forindividualized-medicine/ (Accessed February 14, 2019).
20. Srivastava, S., Reed, B.J., Ghosh, S. et al. (2016). Research needs for understanding the biology
of overdiagnosis in cancer screening. J. Cell. Physiol. 231 (9): 1870–1875.
21. National Institutes of Health Roadmap Epigenomics Mapping Consortium. http://www.road
mapepigenomics.org/ (Accessed February 14, 2019).
22. National Institutes of Health Human Microbiome Project. http://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/
index (Accessed February 14, 2019).

IV
Navigating the Cancer
Experience

8
Navigating the Cancer
Experience
David C. Nalepinski
Duke Cancer Institute, Durham, NC, USA

Introduction
The concept of cancer patient navigation has varying definitions, depending on the
specifics of the disease, the patient population, and the care setting and resources.
Cancer is a complex disease that usually requires the expertise of many healthcare
specialties and resources that need to be integrated and coordinated to provide the
best care for cancer patients. Patient navigators, and the navigation they provide,
vary depending on the specific setting. For example, patient navigation may refer
to: increasing access to screening for underserved populations; helping patients
overcome barriers they encounter within the healthcare system during their treatment; ensuring patients have access to supportive care during treatment; ensuring
patients have a smooth transition into survivorship (life beyond treatment); increasing access to clinical trials; or ensuring care is well planned and coordinated
between the multiple disciplines involved in treatment. All of these examples are
considered patient navigation. As such, patient navigators may have differing
expertise and expectations placed upon them. For example, a navigator may refer
to: a trained volunteer familiar with the culture of an underserved population; a
nurse specialist that is familiar with the trajectory of a specific disease and the
resources required to treat it; a research coordinator familiar with a specific research
Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

147

148

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

trial; or an administrative coordinator that increases the coordination of care. These
are only a few examples of the types of patient navigators and their activities.
However, what is common between these examples is the increased access to
needed care, ensuring care is comprehensive, and ensuring the care is well coordinated. This chapter will explain the need for patient navigation and why the
­application of this navigation has wide variation. Some of the explanation centers
on a deeper understanding of the healthcare delivery system, the payment s­ tructure,
and the complexity of cancer. Often, the sum of these variables is what necessitates
the need for patient navigation and patient navigators.
A person who has just been informed they have cancer is likely to be in crisis
and has many questions about their diagnosis. What does this mean? What happens
now? How will I get the care I need? How will I pay for this? Will I survive? While
the severity of this crisis may differ based on a person’s current access to family
and community support, healthcare resources and the type of disease they were
diagnosed with, one thing is almost certain: Cancer can be an overwhelming and
confusing disease to navigate. A newly diagnosed person’s anxiety can be further
exacerbated by the complexity of the healthcare system itself. Is the patient to be
seen within one comprehensive center that offers all treatment and supportive
­services, or will they be seen by multiple centers within a given region with each
only providing a specific part of the care? Are all needed services even available to
the patient? Patient navigation may actually begin before a patient even knows they
have cancer, which presents broader questions. Does every segment of our population have access to primary care and screening? Are some patients left undiagnosed until the disease has progressed to more severe stages?
While the concept of patient navigation and patient navigators may not provide
the answers to all of these questions, navigation may greatly improve the patient
experience and may help ensure patients are accessing the healthcare resources
they need, with a high degree of coordination. What roles have navigation played
for patients? What might cancer navigation look like in a specific patient’s local
healthcare environment?

The Complexity of Cancer Care
Introduction
Before we further explore how patient navigation is used in cancer care, it is important to understand why patient navigation is needed in the first place. There are
many important variables to understand that contribute to the challenges a cancer
patient may experience, including: the various types and severity of cancer a patient
may have, the local healthcare system in which a patient is treated, and the United
States healthcare delivery system model and its payment structure. Having a deeper
understanding of these variables will provide needed context for exploring the

The Complexity of Ca nc er Care

149

various ways the concept of patient navigation has developed and the various ways
patient navigators are deployed.
Treating Cancer
Cancer has been a recognized human health condition throughout recorded history. However, only during the past 100 years have we begun to understand the
disease, treat it, and sought to prevent and cure it. During the nineteenth century,
surgery and anesthesia advanced as the primary treatment to remove tumors [1].
Diagnosis and the success of treatment was soon aided by the evolution of cellular
pathology and the use of the microscope to better understand tumors and margins
of healthy tissue [1]. In the twentieth century, cancer screening, early detection,
prevention, and epidemiology became part of the cancer paradigm. While surgery
continued to advance as a primary treatment option, the second half of the twentieth century witnessed the evolution of chemotherapy as an option to eradicate
tumor cells [1]. The last quarter of the twentieth century saw advances in radiation
physics and computer technology, adding various forms of radiation therapy as
viable treatment options [1]. Immunotherapy and targeted therapy have also been
added to the menu of treatment options [1]. Our knowledge about cancer and
cancer treatment has advanced more in the past two decades than it has in the past
few centuries [1]. We are advancing our understanding of cancer, its cause, and its
treatment at rapid rates through expansive clinical trials, advances in molecular
biology, completion of the human genome and the growth of cancer genetics, and
gene expression p­ rofiling. The numerous types of cancer and the complexities
inherent in its p­ revention, detection, progression, and treatment defined cancer as
one of the most complex groups of diseases. Further, effectively managing cancer
goes far beyond the treatment of tumors and cancer cells. Treatment needs to be
patient centric to succeed.
Treating the Cancer Patient
Often, patient navigation plays critical roles in ensuring patients have access to all
levels of care required for successful cancer treatment. While it is certainly important to understand the complexity of treating cancer tumors and cells, it is also
important to understand the additional needs of cancer patients. Cancer patients
often have many side effects from treatment and comorbidities that must be managed. Even beyond cancer treatment, cancer survivors may continue to have
increased needs related to their specific cancer disease. In 2005, the Institute of
Medicine released their landmark report From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor:
Lost in Transition which highlighted the disconnect between a successful cancer
treatment and life after cancer [2]. As survivor numbers continue to increase, more
and more patients recognize that their primary healthcare providers are ill prepared
for the unique health issues experienced by growing numbers of survivors.

150

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

Survivorship care planning highlights the monitoring, comorbidities, and secondary issues that a cancer patient and their care team must focus on, beyond treating
the disease itself. Survivorship programs and their associated supportive services
focus on treating the whole patient through services that address issues such as:
treatment tracking and summary, cardiomyopathy, nerve pain, impaired mobility,
osteoporosis, anxiety, depression, cognitive dysfunction, spiritual distress,
advanced care planning, advanced directives, nutrition, financial conciliation, support groups, massage, art therapy, and coping skills. Successful cancer treatment
combines the various treatment modalities to eliminate the tumor and the supportive services to successfully treat the whole patient. However, as we have increased
our ability to successfully treat the whole cancer patient, we have also increased
the complexity of the treatment and the number of variables that need to be
­managed. Often, patient navigation is the safety net that ensures a patient has
access to all of the services required in the complex healthcare system.
The Complex System
The US Healthcare Landscape
The US healthcare delivery system, its allocation of resources, the policies that
govern it, and its financial drivers are incredibly complex. Patient navigation can
have a tremendous impact on a cancer patient with a progressive disease that uses
many disparate resources within the healthcare system. While national healthcare
delivery systems vary somewhat by the level of economic and industrial development, we find further variance even among affluent and industrialized nations [3].
Countries like the Soviet Union and Czech Republic have centrally planned healthcare services, some European countries like Great Britain and Norway may have
universal and comprehensive healthcare services, and countries like Canada and
Japan have universal basic coverage [3]. A country’s government structure and
associated healthcare policies often dictate its healthcare infrastructure. Although
the US system is considered primarily “entrepreneurial and permissive,” [3] it
includes many aspects of other systems, further complicating the delivery of healthcare services. The United States combines centrally planned services like the
Veterans Administration, welfare‐oriented services like Medicare and Medicaid,
and private sector services. All services are delivered through a dispersed model of
care, which is characterized by less structure, high competition, minimal central
planning, entry at all levels of care, and a focus on secondary and tertiary levels of
care (see box) [4]. Many other affluent industrialized nations have adopted a regionalized model of care that has central planning of resources, dictating the levels of
primary, secondary, and tertiary care resources. The result of central ­planning is
systems with roughly two‐thirds primary care and one‐third specialized care – the
inverse of the United States’ system of care [4]. While we will not discuss all the
pros and cons of each system, it is worth mentioning that navigating the United

The Complexity of Ca nc er Care

151

Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Care [4]
Most healthcare systems in affluent industrialized nations include the following levels of care:
Primary Care – Performs basic ongoing health maintenance and preventative services for a population. May address common health problems,
perform screening services, and vaccinations. Primary care may also act as
a “gatekeeper” to higher levels of care.
Secondary Care – Addresses problems that require a higher level of care
and may include ambulatory and inpatient services of a regional hospital.
Secondary care may also play a role in regular treatment of chronic health
issues, such as diabetes.
Tertiary Care – Provides the highest level of subspecialized care for complex
and uncommon health conditions.
Quaternary Care – While not as common as other care resources, it is important to mention the important role of quaternary care, which includes
research and clinical trials, usually at Academic Medical Centers.
Most cancer patients will use each level of care at various times during the
trajectory of their disease.

States’ dispersed healthcare landscape is considerably complicated. Further, in a
dispersed model there is much less focus on the coordination of care and p­ reventative
and primary care, which may add to the difficulty for a cancer patient trying to navigate their treatment journey alone, without the assistance of a patient navigator.
Accountable Care Organizations
In recent years, the concept of Accountable Care Organizations (ACO) has emerged
as a possible solution to reduce the complexity of our dispersed model of care. In
this model of healthcare resources existing within a geographic region are incentivized to work together to manage patient care across the continuum of care. They are
collectively accountable for the capacity of the system, the costs of care, and the
quality of the care delivered. Incentives are through shared savings from p­ articipating
payers. While this model holds promise for increased coordination of care, increased
quality of care, and reduced costs of care delivery, it is fairly ­complicated to implement in the existing entrepreneurial and dispersed system. As such, it has not yet
been widely adopted and has not yet lessened the need for patient navigation.
Influence of Payment Structure [4]
The payment structure in the dispersed model of care in the United States
increases the challenges for cancer patients. Access to services, coordination of
care, access to supportive services, and the overall quality of care received may all

152

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

have increased complexity based on payment structure and incentives. Our goal
here is not to fully define all aspects of the payment structure, but to highlight the
variation in the payment structure.
• Modes of Financing – Includes: out‐of‐pocket, individual private insurance,
employment‐based insurance, government sponsored
• Types of Health Plans – Includes: Indemnity, Health Maintenance
Organizations, Preferred Provider Organizations
• Reimbursement Methods – Includes: Fee for Service, Per Diem, Per
Episode, Capitation, Global
• This diverse payment structure may often dictate when and where a cancer
patient can be seen, possibly usurping well‐coordinated care.
Many different combinations of these modes of financing, types of health plans,
and reimbursement models may coexist in any given geographic location within
our system of healthcare delivery. Further, each combination may exert differing
levels of incentives, access, and treatment options. The influence of this diverse
payment structure has mostly served to exacerbate the dispersed nature of the US
healthcare delivery system and dilute any efforts toward regional planning and
coordination of care.
A Complex Disease: Components of Cancer Care
While it is true that the US healthcare system is complex overall, it is particularly
complex and resource intensive for the treatment of cancer. Figure 1 highlights
common components of the healthcare delivery system for cancer patients. The
cancer care paradigm starts with effective cancer control at the population level
and may include education, promotion of healthy lifestyles, preventative care, risk
reduction, and access to primary care – all aimed at reducing the burden of cancer [5].
Through effective screening, cancers are diagnosed and patients are referred into
treatment. Treatment usually consists of combinations of cancer treatment modalities such as surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. Following treatment, patients
may resume relationships with their primary care provider who may ­continue to
manage comorbidities and cancer treatment related issues, as well as provide
­surveillance for recurrence. In the best case scenario, treatment would be well
coordinated between disciplines and include access to clinical trials, navigation,
and supportive services.
Generally, this healthcare delivery is within the context of the overarching
­system of care described above, and, as such, can exist within several different
configurations that vary by geographic location. The most comprehensive cancer
centers are those designated as such by the National Cancer Institute. These ­centers
usually include robust research, multidisciplinary state of the art treatment, access
to treatment for rare cancers, education, outreach, and cancer control programs [6].

153

The Complexity of Ca nc er Care

Prevention
Referring
Screening
providers/
Primary Care

Nutrition/Rehab/Palliative
Research/Clinical Trials
Navigation/Care-Management
Supportive Services

Diagnosis:
Radiology/
Pathology

Treatment
Modality
Surgery

Treatment
Modality
Chemotherapy

Treatment
Modality
Radiation

Treatment
Support
Survivorship

Referring
Providers/
Primary Care
Cancer Care
F/u

Patient Conferences
Interdisciplinary care
PROGRESSION OF DISEASE/CARE PATH

Figure 1. Common components of the healthcare delivery system for cancer patients.

Further, the comprehensive services, such as those highlighted in Figure 1, are
­usually available within one center, increasing the opportunity and likelihood that
services are comprehensive and well coordinated. However, there are fewer than
50 National Cancer Institute (NCI) designated cancer centers in the United States.
Often, cancer patients receive different aspects of their treatments from multiple
centers that each feature different specialized treatment modalities located within
a given geographic location. In the best case scenario, disparate resources located
in a geographic location would have relationships and systems that foster well‐
coordinated care for cancer patients requiring multidisciplinary services. Often,
this is not the case and patients are required to be their own advocate to navigate
the system. Further, they may have limited or no access to supportive services.
Even if a patient is fortunate enough to be treated within a region that provides
comprehensive well‐coordinated care, either by one comprehensive center or by a
combination of centers with optimal relationships and delivery systems, the trajectory of the disease and the sheer number of different resources needed may present
immense challenges for a patient trying to navigate the system. Figure 2a below is
a sample care path for a suspect breast cancer patient entering the complex system
of care. In this example, steps are taken to diagnose and/or to confirm a diagnosis,
to triage for the type of care the patient may require, and to align the necessary
resources the patient will require for treatment. As the sample demonstrates, there
are multiple decision points in the care path, as well as multiple clinical and administrative resources required just to get the patient to the treatment they require.
Figure 2b shows the complex care path for a patient receiving treatment, after the
steps in Figure 2a are complete. Again, there are multiple decision points, as well
as multiple clinical specialties, each with their own modality specific aligned clinical
and administrative resources.

(a)

Sample Breast Cancer Program: External Referral Intake Process

Referral Received

Breast Cancer
diagnosis?
yes

SUBPROCESS:
Patient
information
Request/
Receipt

Need to also
complete
registration
Contact Patient
within 1 day of
referral to complete
MRI questionnaire

Rad Onc
Appointment?

yes

Notify Rad Onc
secretary apt.
needed

Sub-process for
DVDs? who sends
and under
what
Med
onc secretary
conditions
schedules Rad Onc
(algorithm)
Appointment

Med Onc
Appointment?

yes

Notify Med Onc
Secretary apt.
needed

Med onc secretary
schedules Med Onc
Appointment

Notify Patient of
Appointment

Surgeon
Appointment?

yes

Plastics
Appointment?

yes

Schedule
Appointment(s)

Enter prders for
Tests, Film Review,
MRI; Route to NN
(or APRN) to Sign

MRI
Appointment?

Notify Patient of
Appointment

no
*OSF easy to
work with
(trust)?

Checklist sent to
Secretary or OSF
Patient requests
the information if
self-referred

SUBPROCESS:
Patient
information
Request/
Receipt

Wait until Patient
Information is
received

Out of
Scope

no

yes

Med onc secretary
request chemo
Video from SDM, if
applicable

no
Patient
Contacted?

no

If not contacted
after 3 attempts,
make a note in EMR

yes

Are Patient
Psychosocial
Needs Met?

yes

Information
receive (SUBPROCESS*)?

yes

Make Appointments

no

Triage Question?

yes

Refer to Social
Worker/CCM to call
patient

no

call patient with
Appointment
information

yes
yes
Other
Appointments
(tests)?

SW/CCM Call patient
to assess; provide
Appropriate Support

Patient information Request/Receipt

SUBPROCESS*:
Patient
information
Request/
Receipt

Additional info.
needed?

no

OSF send images to
film library (mail or
electronic)

Film Library
Receives images

OSF sends Patient
Information:
Provider notes and
paper reports

As Information
received, Send
Reports to MR to
scan (by fax or send
hard copy)

OSF sends Patient
Information: Path,
slides, and blocks

Pathology Receives
slides/Blocks;
Reviews

NN Reviews/Triage
for Appropriate
Appointment/
Tests

Film Library Notifies
Program actual films
are received

Keep in completed program
cancer pt file; discard after 6
months after confirming all are
scanned

yes

Schedule MRI
Appointment

Additional
Appointments/
information
Needed?

NN to Review:
1. Additional notes/
path needed?
2. Additional appts.
needed?
Call Pratient:
Introduce to
Program, Assess
Patient
Goal: Contact 1 wk
pre visit. How does
NN know of new
apts?

Request DVD from
SDM, if applicable
(SDM sends to
patient)

NN signs Orders

As per protocal
orders. Order set
established?

Yellow Callouts: Delete
callout when question
is resolved

Legend

yes
Re-contact patient
or OSF for the
Required
Information

Coord checks in eDH
for path review

Not received 2 days
pre-apt: contact
surgeon/med onc.
May cancel and
reschedule.

Send Patient Letter
(cc NN to notify of
new patient and to
SDM)

CCM: Continuing Care Manager
Med Onc: Medical Oncology
MR: Medical Records
NN: Nurse Navigator
OSF: Outside Facility
Rad Onc Radiation Oncology
SDM: Shared Decision Making

Patient Contact

Clarifications

Nurse Navigator

Internal Group

CBP Coordinator

Outside Facility

Figure 2. (a) Patient care path for suspect breast cancer patient entering a cancer care delivery. (b) Patient care path for a breast cancer patient starting out.

154

(b)
Stress on patient;
delays (factual)
Sample External
Referral Process

Very First
Appointment w/
Program

Radiology (50%)
Undiagnosed
Surgery
(General)
(40%)

Abnormal
Breast
Exam

Lost to follow up
Abnormality

Biopsy

Diagnosis
with
Breast
Cancer

Referred back
to
Program

Algorithm
to
decide

High risk

Breast Surgeon (9%)

Resolving
Problem?

Coordinator Cells
Patient (Sometimes
contact Social
worker prior to
biopsy)

Shared
Decision
Making

Psycho
social
needs

Refer to Social
Worker and Social
Worker Contacts
Patient

Surgery;
Medical
Oncology
(25%)

Surgical
Planning

Surgery
(OR)

2 week
transition

Follow up
after
surgery

Surgery; Rad Onc;
Mes Onc; PT;
Genetic Counseling

Plastic
surgery
(15%)

Follow up at
discretion of the
Radiologist

Referring
Provider

Surgery
Alone
(65%)

Chemotherapy

Not sure who was
in change; felt like
“big soup”

Radiation

Surveillance
(5–10 years)

Chemotherapy

Endocrine
Therapy

Monitor Problem
Plastic Surgery (1%)

Legend
Issues
Start/End Point

Process Step

Research Protocols
Decision Point

More to Map

Additional
Discussions needed

Figure 2. (Continued )

155

Survivorship

156

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

Recall that the resources in this example may exist within a single comprehensive center or a combination of centers and regional resources within a specific
geographic location. Additionally, this is an example for one type of cancer. The
trajectory of care may vary based on the type of cancer and the resources required
for that cancer in a specific geographic location. To this end, there would be many
variations by geographic location, cancer type, and patient insurance type and
status.
In Figure 2a and b, we are viewing a sample system for a breast cancer patient
from the system perspective. Figure 3 demonstrates what the healthcare delivery
system may look like from the patient perspective. In this example, a patient was
seen at a comprehensive center with a high degree of care coordination. In over
six months, the patient had 55 encounters with the healthcare delivery system,
demonstrating the complexity of treatment even in an optimal treatment delivery
environment.
Summary
There are many components that contribute to the complexity of cancer care in the
US healthcare system. Generally, cancer treatment has evolved to include the
expertise of multiple treatment modalities. Most cancer patients also benefit from
the addition of supportive services that meet a patient’s additional needs related to
psychosocial issues, comorbidities, and the common side‐effects of treatment.
Complexity is further increased by the dispersed model of healthcare delivery and
its complicated payer system in the United States. We have to ensure that, regardless of the specific disease or geographic location, a patient is gaining access to the
resources they need for proper preventative and primary care, screening, and treatment should they present with disease. There is no question that, on many levels,
patients may benefit from resources that help them navigate the complex cancer
care environment. The next section highlights the various ways navigation is used
to overcome the complexities of the healthcare environment.
Patient Navigation in Cancer Care
Evolution of Patient Navigation
The concept of patient navigation in cancer care was not originally predicated on
navigating the complexity of the disease and the system of care in which it is
treated. The concept originated to address disparities in access to cancer care in the
poor populations of the nation [8]. In 1988 Dr. Harold P. Freeman, then President
of the American Cancer Society (ACS), presented findings at an ACS Quality
Assurance workshop that highlighted these disparities. At the time, advances in
treatment and diagnosis of cancer were making significant strides in increasing

Biopsy on
10.27

Breast Care
Coordinator
(BCC)

10.31

10.31

11.9

MRI #1

Shared
Decision
Making (SDM)

11.9

MRI #2

11.9

Surgeon

11.9

Med.
Oncologist

Bone
Scan

11.11

11.23
Wig

11.23

11.23

Breast
imaging
study

12.16

Med.
Oncologist

CT Scan

11.23

echocardio
gram

Lab work

11.25

11.25

Med.
Oncologist

11.25

Infusion #1

12.9

1.27.06

Med.
Oncologist

1.6.06

Wig and
stylist

12.12
Wigstylist

12.16

Lab work

12.16

Infusion
#2

Breast
imaging
study

12.21

1.6

Lab work

Infusion #3

1.27.06
11:30–lab
work

2.16.06

Med.
Oncologist

Infusion #4
(end chemo
rex 1)

2.16.06

2.16.06

2.17.06

MRI

echocardio
gram

Lab work

2.17

Med.
Oncologist

2.17

2.17
1:29–indusion
#1 (scheduled
for 1:00

2.24.06

Lab
work

2.24.06

Infusion #2

3.3.06

Lab work

3.10.06

Infusion
#3

Lab work

3.10.06

Med.
Oncologist

3.10.06

3.10.06
Infusion #4 3.17.06

12:15-Lab
work

3.17.06

Breast
imaging 3.17.06
study

2:30Infusion #5 3.17.06
check in

Pharmacy

3.17.06

Infusion #5 3.24.06

Genetic
Testing

3.24.06

Lab
work

3.24.06
Infusion #6 3.31.06

12:45-Lab 3.31.06
work

1:45-Med.
Oncologist

3.31.06

3:00Infusion #7

4.7.06

12:10-Lab
4.7.06
work

SDM- P/u
4.7.06
video

1:154.14.06
Infusion #8

Lab work

4.14.06
1:00Infusion #9

Figure 3. Breast cancer healthcare delivery system from the perspective of a patient. Source: Courtesy of Laam [7].

157

158

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

survival rates and the quality of life for cancer patients. However, these improvements were not having equal impact on groups of lower socioeconomic status [9].
The report highlighted gaps in these groups’ ability to pay for and obtain care.
Moreover, programs aimed at educating the public about cancer prevention and
care were not reaching these groups, leaving them with gaps in care and a sense of
hopelessness related to the disease [8]. Subsequently, In 1990 Dr. Freeman started
what is widely considered to be the first patient navigation program at a Harlem
New York public hospital aimed at identifying breast cancer earlier in poor African
American woman [8]. While initially aimed at reducing financial, communication,
system, and emotional barriers to screening and diagnosis, efforts soon expanded
to guide patients across the cancer care continuum [8]. Retrospective studies of
these efforts demonstrated significant improvements in early detection and survival rates for this population [10]. The concept of patient navigation in cancer care
has continued to evolve since Dr. Freeman’s ground‐breaking efforts.
While there are many variations in how patient navigation meets the needs of
cancer patients, most are based on a few common themes. Cancer care is a complex disease that is treated in a complex dispersed healthcare system. There are
underserved populations that need access to screening and care. Once diagnosed,
patients need access to timely treatment that is comprehensive and well coordinated. Additionally, patients benefit from supportive services that meet all of a
patient’s needs. In the following sections, we will review the ways patient navigation has been implemented, how benefits have been measured, and how a changing
paradigm in healthcare may or may not warrant an expansion of navigation in
cancer care.
Uses of Patient Navigation in Cancer Care
Access to Screening and Care for Underserved Populations
Since Dr. Freeman’s use of patient navigation in 1990 Harlem, NY to correct disparities in timely access to the healthcare system for poor African American women
with breast cancer, access to cancer care for underserved populations has been a
key aim for the use of patient navigators [10]. For example, the NCI has long
attributed higher cancer mortality rates for Native Americans to their presenting
with more advanced stages of cancer [11]. Under NCI’s Cancer Disparities
Research Partnership Program, many Native Americans have been targeted for
education programs encouraging screening [11]. Additional community‐based
research, such as the Native Navigators and the Cancer Continuum, have worked
to understand the unique and complex cultural barriers that exist to thwart Native
American access to screening and early detection. In this case, language, customs,
and attitudes are significant barriers to members of tribes seeking early interventions for disease (Even using the word “Cancer” is believed to invite the disease
into the host) [12]. For this population, it is important for the navigator to be

Patie n t Navigation i n Ca nc er Care

159

i­mbedded in the tribal community with a full understanding of language and customs. Cancer education at the community level is beyond the common scope of
cancer navigators, but in this case has proven to be very successful at increasing
knowledge, referrals, and access to care [13, 14]. In these settings, communication,
trust, and relationships seem to be the most important attributes for patient
navigators.
Similar models of community‐embedded lay patient navigators have proven
successful for other underserved populations as well [15]. Many of these navigation efforts have focused on increasing colorectal cancer screening for minority
populations in an urban setting. Similar to the efforts with Native Americans, these
efforts used lay and peer patient navigators that were culturally similar to the
underserved populations. These efforts resulted in statistically significant increases
in screening for these populations [16–20]. Further, these interventions have
proven to be cost effective for the healthcare system [21–23].
Various patient navigation interventions for underserved populations have similar criteria for success. There must be a recognized health disparity for an underserved population; such as access to screening and its associated early detection of
cancer or the lack of adequate preventative and primary care [24]. The cause of
these disparities must be identified; such as language, socioeconomic, or cultural
barriers [24]. Then, the role of a patient navigator can be developed to reduce these
health disparities. In these instances, the navigator is often a trained lay or peer
navigator that understands the unique issues for an underserved population, with
the ability to guide patients to the resources they need, removing barriers along the
way. While the use of patient navigation at the front end of the cancer care
­continuum does not seem to have a broad application for all populations, it has
proven immensely successful in reducing screening and access disparities for
underserved populations.
Community/PCP‐Based Navigation
In considering the common components of the healthcare delivery system for
­cancer care (Figure 1), many think of the role of primary care as having responsibility for prevention and screening, as a referral source for treatment subspecialties, and as the medical home for a patient before and after treatment. Most patient
navigators in cancer care are part of the cancer care system and partner with the
patient when they enter the diagnostic and treatment phases of care. However, in
many rural settings where the components of treatment are dispersed, patient navigation that is based within the primary care medical home may be the preferred
model for success. In these settings, community or primary care provider (PCP)‐
based navigators can help diagnosed patients identify and overcome barriers to
care at various treatment facilities [25]. Patients that have a navigation resource to
provide logistical and psychosocial support have a high rate of treatment a­ dherence
in a dispersed system [25]. In this scenario, we may imagine the patient navigator
as an added resource. However, we should consider the role the PCP may play as

160

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

the patient advocate in cancer care navigation. In a dispersed system, the patient’s
primary care provider may be the best resource to help the patients and their families understand the diagnosis, research and choose treatment teams, obtain support
resources, assist with rehabilitation, monitor for reoccurrence, provide access to
palliation, address psychosocial issues, and manage the patient’s comorbidities
[26]. Often, however, the PCP may simply refer the patient to an oncologist and
expect the medical home to transfer to the oncologist during treatment, and hope
to resume their relationship with the patient after treatment [26]. This may be
acceptable if the PCP is referring the patient into a well‐coordinated and comprehensive system of cancer care. However, if the system of cancer care is disseminated to various resources in a region, the patient may be best served with their
PCP remaining as the medical home and patient advocate to navigate the patient
through their treatment journey.
Overcoming Barriers to Care
As we have established, the idea of patient navigation originated to help ­underserved
populations gain access to screening and needed care. The concept was expanded
through all phases of care to assist patients in dealing with the complexity of the
disease of cancer and the system in which it is treated. Often this complexity manifests as barriers to care. In fact, barriers exist through the treatment journey, from
access to screening through survivorship, and are present in various forms. Barriers
may include: access to screening, timely access to care, language and communication challenges, scheduling difficulties, lack of education about treatment options,
fear, employment challenges, insurance and financial issues, transportation, social
issues, lack of transitional care, and lack of practical support. Patient navigation has
been shown to help patients overcome these barriers and have helped make care
assessable, affordable, and appropriate [27]. More importantly, navigators serve as
a point of contact across the system of care that can continually assess barriers as
they arise and provide the patient with efficient access to resources that will help
them overcome these barriers [28]. Often the barriers and the combination of barriers are as unique as the cancer itself and the system of care in which it is treated. As
such, the concept of patient navigation is deployed in a wide variety of ways.
Patient Navigation Across the Cancer Care Continuum
A patient may encounter many types of patient navigation across the cancer care
continuum. In primary care and prevention the navigator may be a trained lay person, with a unique understanding of the population being served, who can guide
them to screening if warranted. In disease diagnosis, the navigator may be a social
worker that is able to help the patient cope with the new reality they are facing. In
treatment, the navigator may be a clinically trained nurse navigator that provides
education and a thorough understanding of the various phases of treatment and the
resources needed [29]. In survivorship, the navigator may be a nurse practitioner

Patie n t Navigation i n Ca nc er Care

161

that can help develop a long‐term posttreatment plan [29]. Assuming a cancer
patient has overcome barriers to screening and diagnosis and has entered a system
of cancer care, the need for navigating the complexity of the disease and its c­ omplex
treatment remains. As Figure 2a and b demonstrate, a patient going through cancer
treatment, even in a comprehensive well‐coordinated setting, will encounter many
touch points, decision points, and potential trajectories. While those involved in
care coordination and delivery (doctors, nurses, scheduling secretaries, supportive
services, etc.) may view the system in which they work as fairly straightforward,
from the patient’s point of reference there is ample opportunity to feel lost within
the system and disconnected from their treatment plan. Increasingly, an Oncology
Nurse Navigator is used to partner with the patient and serve as a common
­touchpoint through the treatment phase of cancer care.
The Oncology Nurse Navigator
Though Dr. Freeman first introduced the concept of cancer navigation long ago,
the role and function of the Oncology Nurse Navigator (ONN) has not been
­formally defined. A contributing factor may be the variability of the different
­cancer care delivery systems. The concept of patient navigation is often developed
to meet the unique needs of a given system, thereby increasing the variability in the
navigation role itself. In recent years, the Oncology Nursing Society (ONS) has
worked to delineate the role of an ONN and provide a better foundation for the role
[30]. In their 2012 report, “Oncology Nurse Navigator Role Delineation Study: An
Oncology Nursing Society Report,” they identified the tasks, knowledge areas, and
skills for ONNs [30].
As the role delineation above demonstrates, the tasks of an ONN goes far beyond
treating the disease, with an increased focus on the treating the whole patient and
improving the patient experience [31]. Not only does the role of an ONN improve the
experience and outcomes for the patient, it improves the experience for those working in the system of care by increasing communication and collaboration [31]. While
other members of the care delivery team may have similar knowledge and perform
similar tasks to that of the ONN, having this role dedicated to these activities may
help insure they actually happen, and they provide a singular contact point for the
patient through their journey. While this role may be additive to the system, current
data suggests that there is a significant return on investment. It is important, however,
that the role of the ONN is clearly defined as it relates to the patient care activities of
other providers in the system. Any duplication of efforts between the ONN and the
rest of the care team may actually add complexity and confusion to the system. In the
best‐case scenario, a clear care path has been developed that defines the possible
trajectories of care through the system from the patient’s perspective. In this way, the
roles of the care team and how they interrelate can be clearly defined and it provides
a plan that the navigator and patient can follow. One of the benefits of an ONN
resource that is developed from within the care delivery system is that the role can be
clearly defined as it relates to other parts of a specific system, providing clarity for all
involved. However, this is not the only navigation model that is successful.

162

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

Current Role of the American Cancer Society in Patient Navigation
The ACS was involved in cancer patient navigation from the very beginning (with
Dr. Freeman’s work) and they still play a very active role. While some cancer care
delivery systems have the resources to develop internally sourced ONNs, not all
cancer systems have been able to do so. Regardless of a specific cancer care delivery system’s ability to develop navigation resources from within, the ACS has
made it part of their mission to train nonmedical ACS navigators, identify barriers,
and adapt to any system to assist patients and care providers with navigating the
complex system of cancer care [32]. Like the ONN, the ACS navigators focus on
the care provided after a definitive diagnosis has been made. There are currently
119 ACS patient navigation sites in the United States, with navigators of varied
background, but usually with some experience related to healthcare [32]. In the
ACS model, the patient navigator becomes familiar with all parts of the care
­delivery system and becomes integrated with the various parts of the care team.
While this resource is sourced externally from the care delivery system, it is still a
significantly effective navigation model. Unlike an internally sourced ONN, the
externally sourced ACS patient navigator is less likely to have specific program
bias and is able to more freely engage all system resources on behalf of the patient.
This may be especially true when care delivery system consists of many dispersed
regionally components (as opposed to a comprehensive center). However, like the
ONN model, the ACS navigation model does require additional resources and
infrastructure, which may not be an option in systems where resources are more
constrained.
The Role of the Lay Person in Patient Navigation
In some healthcare systems, there has been some success developing patient
navigation programs from limited resources. In Canada, some successful programs have been developed through the use of volunteers [33]. The Canadian
Partnership Against Cancer’s Cancer Journey Action Group defines cancer navigation as, “a proactive, intentional process of collaborating with a person and
his or her family to provide guidance as they negotiate the maze of treatments,
services and potential barriers through the cancer journey” [33]. In several
provinces they have developed programs that train, screen, and provide support
to volunteer navigators. They carefully evaluate what role the navigator will
play in a particular system of care, clearly describe the scope of influence of the
navigator, and imbed the navigator in a particular program [33]. There are
attributes of this program that contribute to its success that may serve as lessons
for all patient navigation programs. Since one aim of the program is to have a
high impact with few resources, considerable effort is put into understanding
the system and developing the navigator’s role. While the navigators are “lay
persons,” the selection, training, support, and evaluation of navigators is fairly
rigorous, as is the specificity in how the resource is used in the system. As a
result of this effort, the programs have had high retention of volunteers and a
high demand for services [33].

The Curre nt Need for Patie nt Navigation (Co nclusio n)

163

The Clinical Nurse Specialist
While similar to the role of an ONN, the role of the Clinical Nurse Specialist
(CNS) has been developed in many countries with a regionalized healthcare delivery system (as opposed to the United States’ dispersed system of care). In many
European countries, the number of CNS’s has continued to increase as medicine
and surgical fields have continued to subspecialization [34]. Increasingly, the CNS
has been seen as serving an important role in providing continuity of care for
patients in the healthcare system. Unlike the ONN, a CNS is used for many applications in the healthcare delivery system, not just for patients with cancer. However,
for a CNS that is used within a cancer care delivery system, the role is remarkably
similar to an ONN [35–40].
Meeting Additional Patient Needs
Patient navigation in cancer care can increase access to needed care, ensure care is
comprehensive, and ensure the care is well coordinated. Often comprehensive care
goes beyond treating the disease itself and addresses issues that enable a patient to
cope with the side effects and management of their disease and treatment. Two
important elements of comprehensive care are patient distress and access to clinical
trials. Patient Navigators may play an important role related to these elements.
A diagnosis of cancer and its subsequent treatment usually causes distress for a
cancer patient. High levels of distress can impact a patient’s ability to comply with
treatment and can detract from the patient experience [41]. Distress can be effectively managed if detected [42]. The benefits of a patient navigator that partners
with a patient through their treatment journey are twofold. First, the navigator can
play a role in screening and identifying patients that have high levels of distress
and ensure they get access to needed specialists that can help deal with more
­specific issues. Second, the overall involvement of a navigator may actually
decrease the levels of distress for a patient through increased satisfaction, increase
education, and increased adherence to treatment [41].
One of the defining attributes of comprehensive cancer care is access to the best
treatments available, which often includes clinical trials [6]. Access and accrual to
a clinical trial is mutually beneficial for the patient and the facility conducting the
research. Patients get access to the latest treatments and research programs meet
accrual goals that increase the power of their research. Often, a patient navigator
can help patients overcome barriers to clinical trial enrolment through initial
patient education and initial screening for possible eligibility [43–45].
The Current Need for Patient Navigation (Conclusion)
As with healthcare, patient navigation is evolving. It is important to recognize that
navigation has varying definitions, depending on the specifics of the disease, the
patient population, and the care setting and resources. While it is true that cancer is

164

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

a complex disease that usually requires the expertise of many healthcare specialties
and resources, it is the complexity the US healthcare delivery system, its allocation
of resources, the policies that govern it, and its financial drivers that drive most of
the need for navigation. In many instances, patient navigation is an added resource
for a complex system that is already considered very expensive, with diminishing
returns for the increased expense. Most of the measures of success for patient navigation relate to addressing the system’s shortcomings and barriers, including:
increased screening, increased access to care, timely care, patient satisfaction,
adherence to treatment, decreased distress, and increased clinical trial enrollment.
While some models discussed have used existing resources as the foundation for
the development of navigation, navigation is often supplementary and perhaps
superfluous.
The continuing evolution of patient navigation in cancer care should focus on
further differentiating those needs that are only met through the use of a navigator
and needs that are met by a navigator to compensate for system deficiencies. Perhaps,
in the long term, the greatest value derived from the current mottled patient navigation model(s) will be its ability to reveal the inadequacies of the current system of
care, that they can be addressed through other system improvements [46].

References
1. 2015. (Accessed 10 May 2015, at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancerbasics/thehistoryofcancer/
index?sitearea.)
2. Stovall, E., Greenfield, S., and Hewitt, M. (2005). From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost
in Transition. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
3. Barton, P.L. (1999). Understanding the US Health Services System. Chicago: Health
Administration Press.
4. Bodenheimer, T.S. and Grumbach, K. (2004). Understanding Health Policy: A Clinical Approach,
4e. New York, NY: McGraw‐Hill Companies, Inc.
5. National Comprehensive Cancer Control Program (NCCCP). 2015. (Accessed August 18 2015,
2015, at http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/ncccp/what_is_cccp.htm.)
6. 2015. (Accessed 14 May 2015, at https://www.cancer.gov/research/nci‐role/cancer‐centers.)
7. Laam, L.A. (April 2006). CBP Improvement Task Force Update. Dartmouth‐Hitchcock Medical
Center CBP Tumor Board. Lebanon, NH.
8. Freeman, H.P. (2012). The origin, evolution, and principles of patient navigation. Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention 21: 1614–1617.
9. Freeman, H.P. (1989). Cancer in the socioeconomically disadvantaged. CA: A Cancer Journal
for Clinicians 39: 266–288.
10. Freeman, H.P. and Wasfie, T.J. (1989). Cancer of the breast in poor black women. Cancer 63:
2562–2569.
11. Petereit, D.G., Guadagnolo, B.A., Wong, R., and Coleman, C.N. (2011). Addressing cancer
­disparities among American Indians through innovative technologies and patient navigation: the
walking forward experience. Frontiers in Oncology 1: 11.
12. Harjo, L.D., Burhansstipanov, L., and Lindstrom, D. (2014). Rationale for “cultural” native
patient navigators in Indian country. Journal of Cancer Education: The Official Journal of the
American Association for Cancer Education 29: 414–419.

REFERENC ES

165

13. Burhansstipanov, L., Krebs, L.U., Harjo, L. et al. (2014). Providing community education:
­lessons learned from native patient navigators. Journal of Cancer Education: The Official
Journal of the American Association for Cancer Education 29: 596–606.
14. Burhansstipanov, L., Krebs, L.U., Dignan, M.B. et al. (2014). Findings from the native navigators and the cancer continuum (NNACC) study. Journal of Cancer Education: The Official
Journal of the American Association for Cancer Education 29: 420–427.
15. Meade, C.D., Wells, K.J., Arevalo, M. et al. (2014). Lay navigator model for impacting cancer
health disparities. Journal of Cancer Education: The Official Journal of the American Association
for Cancer Education 29: 449–457.
16. Jandorf, L., Cooperman, J.L., Stossel, L.M. et al. (2013). Implementation of culturally targeted
patient navigation system for screening colonoscopy in a direct referral system. Health Education
Research 28: 803–815.
17. Horne, H.N., Phelan‐Emrick, D.F., Pollack, C.E. et al. (2015). Effect of patient navigation on
colorectal cancer screening in a community‐based randomized controlled trial of urban African
American adults. Cancer Causes and Control: CCC 26: 239–246.
18. Braschi, C.D., Sly, J.R., Singh, S. et al. (2014). Increasing colonoscopy screening for Latino
Americans through a patient navigation model: a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Immigrant
and Minority Health/Center for Minority Public Health 16: 934–940.
19. Sly, J.R., Edwards, T., Shelton, R.C., and Jandorf, L. (2013). Identifying barriers to colonoscopy
screening for nonadherent African American participants in a patient navigation intervention.
Health Education & Behavior: The Official Publication of the Society for Public Health
Education 40: 449–457.
20. Jandorf, L., Braschi, C., Ernstoff, E. et al. (2013). Culturally targeted patient navigation for increasing African Americans’ adherence to screening colonoscopy: a randomized clinical trial. Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention: A Publication of the American Association for Cancer
Research, Cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology 22: 1577–1587.
21. Ladabaum, U., Mannalithara, A., Jandorf, L. et al. (2015). Cost‐effectiveness of patient navigation to increase adherence with screening colonoscopy among minority individuals. Cancer 121:
1088–1097.
22. Wilson, F.A., Villarreal, R., Stimpson, J.P. et al. (2014). Cost‐effectiveness analysis of a colonoscopy screening navigator program designed for Hispanic men. Journal of Cancer Education: the
Official Journal of the American Association for Cancer Education 30 (2): 260–267.
23. Jandorf, L., Stossel, L.M., Cooperman, J.L. et al. (2013). Cost analysis of a patient navigation
system to increase screening colonoscopy adherence among urban minorities. Cancer 119:
612–620.
24. Natale‐Pereira, A., Enard, K.R., Nevarez, L. et al. (2011). The role of patient navigators in eliminating health disparities. Cancer 117: 3543–3552.
25. Fouad, M., Wynn, T., Martin, M. et al. (2010). Patient navigation pilot project: results from the
community health advisors in action program (CHAAP). Ethnicity & Disease 20: 155–161.
26. Bernay, T. (2001). Becoming a professional cancer patient advocate: a new niche market practice
for primary care physicians. The Western Journal of Medicine 175: 342–343.
27. Braun, K.L., Kagawa‐Singer, M., Holden, A.E. et al. (2012). Cancer patient navigator tasks
across the cancer care continuum. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 23:
398–413.
28. Ullman, K. (2014). Navigating cancer treatment. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 106:
dju031.
29. Hopkins, J. and Mumber, M.P. (2009). Patient navigation through the cancer care continuum: an
overview. Journal of Oncology Practice/ American Society of Clinical Oncology 5: 150–152.
30. Brown, C.G., Cantril, C., McMullen, L. et al. (2012). Oncology nurse navigator role delineation
study: an oncology nursing society report. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing 16: 581–585.
31. McMullen, L. (2013). Oncology nurse navigators and the continuum of cancer care. Seminars in
Oncology Nursing 29: 105–117.

166

Navigating the Ca ncer Experience

32. Esparza, A. (2013). Patient navigation and the American Cancer Society. Seminars in Oncology
Nursing 29: 91–96.
33. Lorhan, S., Cleghorn, L., Fitch, M. et al. (2013). Moving the agenda forward for cancer patient
navigation: understanding volunteer and peer navigation approaches. Journal of Cancer
Education: The Official Journal of the American Association for Cancer Education 28: 84–91.
34. Pollard, C.A., Garcea, G., Pattenden, C.J. et al. (2010). Justifying the expense of the cancer
Clinical Nurse Specialist. European Journal of Cancer Care 19: 72–79.
35. McPhillips, D., Evans, R., Ryan, D. et al. (2015). The role of a nurse specialist in a modern lung‐
cancer service. British Journal of Nursing (Mark Allen Publishing) 24 (Suppl 4): S21–S27.
36. (2013). Metastatic breast cancer: the clinical nurse specialist. British Journal of Nursing (Mark
Allen Publishing) 22: S10. https://doi.org/10.12968/bjon.2013.22.Sup2.S10.
37. Admi, H., Zohar, H., and Rudner, Y. (2011). “Lighthouse in the dark”: a qualitative study of the
role of breast care nurse specialists in Israel. Nursing & Health Sciences 13: 507–513.
38. Willard, C. and Luker, K. (2007). Working with the team: strategies employed by hospital cancer
nurse specialists to implement their role. Journal of Clinical Nursing 16: 716–724.
39. Moore, S. (2004). Guidelines on the role of the specialist nurse in supporting patients with lung
cancer. European Journal of Cancer Care 13: 344–348.
40. Semple, C. (2001). The role of the CNS in head and neck oncology. Nursing Standard (Royal
College of Nursing [Great Britain]: 1987) 15: 39–42.
41. Swanson, J. and Koch, L. (2010). The role of the oncology nurse navigator in distress management of adult inpatients with cancer: a retrospective study. Oncology Nursing Forum 37:
69–76.
42. Sellick, S.M. and Edwardson, A.D. (2007). Screening new cancer patients for psychological
distress using the hospital anxiety and depression scale. Psycho‐Oncology 16: 534–542.
43. Clair McClung, E., Davis, S.W., Jeffrey, S.S. et al. (2013). Impact of navigation on knowledge
and attitudes about clinical trials among Chinese patients undergoing treatment for breast and
gynecologic cancers. Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health/Center for Minority Public
Health 17 (3): 976–979.
44. Ghebre, R.G., Jones, L.A., Wenzel, J.A. et al. (2014). State‐of‐the‐science of patient navigation
as a strategy for enhancing minority clinical trial accrual. Cancer 120 (Suppl 7): 1122–1130.
45. Steinberg, M.L., Fremont, A., Khan, D.C. et al. (2006). Lay patient navigator program implementation for equal access to cancer care and clinical trials: essential steps and initial challenges.
Cancer 107: 2669–2677.
46. Clark, J.A., Parker, V.A., Battaglia, T.A. et al. (2014). Patterns of task and network actions
performed by navigators to facilitate cancer care. Health Care Management Review 39:
­
90–101.

V
Clinical Dimensions
to Cancer

9
Classification of Tumors,
Their Frequency and
Progression
Richard C. Zieren1,2, Liang Dong1,3,
Sarah R. Amend1, and Kenneth J. Pienta1
The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
2
Department of Urology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3
Department of Urology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

1

In this chapter, we will discuss cancer: how tumors are classified, their frequency
(or how common they are), and their prognosis (or how they behave over time).
Tumor Classification
Tumors are classified by the type of tissue in which they originated, or histologic
type. To understand the tumor classification system, it is helpful to step back briefly
and look at how tissues were formed.
The tissues and organs of the body are formed during embryonic development.
The cells of the early embryo differentiate, or begin to specialize, and then arrange
themselves into three distinct layers, known as embryonic germ cell layers. An inner

Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

169

170

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

layer is the endoderm, the outer layer is the ectoderm, and the middle layer is
the mesoderm.
The three embryonic germ cell layers form the four types of tissues in the
body: nervous tissue (which forms neurons), connective tissue (which forms
loose, dense, adipose, blood, cartilage, bone), epithelial tissue (which forms
­ciliated columnar epithelium, columnar epithelium, cuboidal epithelium, squamous epithelium – all of which are internal and external lining in the body), and
muscular tissue (which forms cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, skeletal muscle,
myoepithelium). In this way: the endoderm‐inner layer becomes the digestive
system, liver, pancreas, and lungs (inner layers); the ectoderm‐external cell
­
layer becomes hair, nails, skin, and the nervous system; and the mesoderm‐middle
layer becomes the circulatory system, lungs (epithelial layers), skeletal system,
and muscular system.
Cancers, or malignant tumors, are classified according to the tissue where they
originated, also called the primary tumor site. There are six main histologic groups:
carcinoma, sarcoma, myeloma, leukemia, lymphoma, and mixed types. Carcinoma
is the cancer from epithelial tissue that is found in the internal and external lining
of the body. There are two types of carcinomas: adenocarcinoma, which develops
in an organ or gland, and squamous cell carcinoma, which develops in the squamous epithelium or skin. Sarcoma is a cancer from connective tissue that is found
in bones, tendons, cartilage, muscle, and fat. Myeloma is a cancer from connective
tissue that is found in plasma cells of bone marrow. Leukemias are cancers that
originate in bone marrow, which derived from connective tissue. Lymphomas are
cancers that originate in the lymphatic system, which derived from connective
­tissue. Mixed types consist of more than one cancer type from either one histologic
group, or from different groups [1].

Metastatic Cancer
Much of cancer prognosis is dependent on whether the cancer has metastasized.
Tumor metastasis is a cancerous tumor that has spread from the place where it
started (primary tumor site) to another place in the body. Even though the tumor
has spread to a new area, it retains the same type of cancer cells as the original
tumor and it retains the same name. For example, when a breast cancer spreads to
the bone and forms a new tumor, the new tumor is a metastatic breast cancer, not a
bone cancer. The most common sites of tumor metastasis are the lung, liver, brain,
and bone. It is not easy for a tumor to metastasize. The following steps are required
for metastasis.
The cancer cells:
• leave the primary tumor and spread into nearby normal tissue (local invasion);
• spread from nearby normal tissue into the walls of nearby blood vessels and
lymph vessels (intravasation);

Tumor Prognosis

171

• travel through the bloodstream and the lymphatic system to other parts of
the body (circulation);
• stop in small blood vessels (capillaries) in another, distant part of the body.
Spread through the walls of the distant capillaries and into the surrounding
tissue (arrest and extravasation);
• multiply in the new, distant tissue, to form new tumors known as micrometastases (proliferation); and
• then, in the new location, the micrometastases form new blood vessels in
order to grow (angiogenesis) [2].
Tumor Frequency
Next, we will look at how often the tumors occur, or their frequency. The frequency
of a certain tumor being diagnosed depends on geographic location; in this chapter
we will focus on tumor frequency within the United States. Specific tumor frequency
is often influenced by a person’s characteristics and behaviors. When applicable, we
will include the gender, age, and race of those most likely to have the tumor, and we
will include well‐known risk factors, such as inherited ­syndromes, occupational
exposures to chemicals, or a history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
We will also discuss how common the cancer is in relation to other cancers,
based on incidence (total number of new cases each year) and prevalence (total
number of cases). We will graphically show the incidence trend of cancers since
1975 until present, which will tell us if the tumor is becoming more frequent, less,
or has remained stable over time.
Tumor Prognosis
Statistics that help to show the prognosis of cancer are the overall five‐year survival rate (percentage of cancer patients that remained alive at least five years), the
incidence rate (new cases per 100 000 people per year), and the mortality rate
(number of cancer caused deaths per 100 000 people per year).
While the overall survival is helpful to know, this is heavily influenced by the
stage of the tumor at diagnosis – generally a tumor found in an earlier stage will
have a better prognosis. Therefore, we include the five‐year relative survival based
on the stage of the tumor. Another interesting prognostic statistic is the comparison
of incidence and mortality trends. If the incidence and mortality lines are far apart,
not many people are dying from the tumor as compared to those who have been
diagnosed with it, suggesting early diagnosis or effective treatment. In contrast, if
the two lines are close, patients are diagnosed with later stages and treatments are
less effective. Also, we include the five‐year survival trend, which demonstrates if
there have been significant improvements per decade, indicating potential progress
with new and better therapies.

172

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

Common Cancer Types
Breast Cancer
Breast cancers are classified by their location and by their histologic (tissue or
­cellular) subtype. Of primary breast cancers 70–80% are infiltrating ductal ­cancers,
followed by lobular and nipple cancers. Atypical subtypes include phyllodes tumor,
angiosarcoma, and primary lymphoma [3].
Breast cancer is the second most frequent in women after skin cancer, and
is the second leading cause of cancer death in women, following lung cancer.
Men account for less than 1% of breast cancer cases [4]. Risk factors for
breast cancer include increasing age, a positive family history, and inheritance of specific genes (for example, BRCA 1 and BRCA 2), and an extended
exposure to estrogen. Approximately 12.4% of women will be diagnosed
with breast cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is
62 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of breast cancer, based on
the 2011–2015 SEER data (a data collection program of the National Cancer
Institute), is 126.0 per 100 000 women per year, and 3 418 124 women, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer
deaths) of breast cancer is 266 120 and 40 920, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all breast cancer cases combined is 89.7%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
­survival is shown in Table 1. Over the past 10 years, the incidence of breast cancer
has been increasing, on average 0.3% per year. However, in the same timeframe,
the mortality of breast cancer has been declining, on average 1.8% per year
(Figure 1) [5].

T a b l e 1. Breast cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)
62
31
6
2

5‐year survival (%)
98.7
85.3
27.0
54.5

Local – cancer is confined to the breast.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the breast.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the breast.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
*Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.

173

Common Can c er T yp es

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival
Number Per
100,000 Persons

150
New cases
100
50

Deaths

0
1975

1985

1995
Year
1995

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
2005
2010
5-year
75.2%
78.4%
86.8%
90.5%
90.9%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Females. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 1. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of breast
cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, females. Rates are age‐
adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Skin Cancer
Skin cancer originates in the epidermis, or outer layer of the skin. The most common skin cancers are the non‐melanoma skin cancers: basal cell carcinoma, the
more common of the two, and squamous cell carcinoma. Actinic keratosis is a skin
condition that occasionally is a precursor of squamous cell carcinoma. Melanoma
is an uncommon form of skin cancer that originates in the lowest part of the
­epidermis and it is the most likely skin cancer to metastasize. The remaining, less
common, primary skin cancers include mycosis fungoides, the Sezary syndrome,
Kaposi sarcoma, and Merkle cell carcinoma.
Melanoma is a malignant tumor of melanocytes, which are cells that make the
pigment melanin. Cutaneous melanoma may originate in the skin or mucosal
­surfaces, while uveal melanoma, which behaves much differently than cutaneous
melanoma, originates in the uveal tract (the pigmented, center tract of three layers
of tissue that make up the eye). The remainder of this section will focus on cutaneous, or skin, melanoma [6, 7].
Melanoma is the fifth most commonly diagnosed cancer, and it occurs more
frequently in men than in women. Risk factors for melanoma include a fair complexion, Caucasian race, and a history of extensive exposure to natural or artificial
sunlight. Approximately 2.3% of men and women will be diagnosed with melanoma during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 64 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of melanoma based on the
2011–2015 SEER data, is 22.8 per 100 000 men and women per year, and 1 222 023
people, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality
(cancer deaths) of melanoma of the skin is 91 270 and 9320 respectively.

174

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

The overall five‐year survival rate of all melanoma cases combined is 91.8%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 2. Over the past 10 years, the incidence of melanoma
has been increasing, on average 1.5% per year. However, in the same timeframe, the mortality of melanoma has been decreasing, on average 1.2%
(Figure 2) [8].

T a b l e 2. Melanoma stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of
cancer

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

5‐year
survival (%)

84
9
4
4

98.4
63.6
22.5
83.7

Local – cancer is confined to the primary site.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the primary site.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the primary site.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
*Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

30
20
New cases
10
Deaths
0
1975
1985

1995
Year
1995

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
2005
2010
5-year
81.8%
86.2%
90.2%
93.3%
93.7%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both Sexes. Rates are Age-adjusted

Figure 2. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of melanoma. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative Survival
Percent from 1975‐2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, females. Rates are age‐adjusted. Source:
https://www.cancer.gov

Common Can c er T yp es

175

Brain and Other Central Nervous System Cancer
The brain and spinal cord comprise the central nervous system (CNS). Brain
tumors account for 85–90% of all primary CNS cancers. The CNS tumors are classified based by the type of cells they originate in, and by their location. Astrocytic
tumors begin in astrocytes (a type of brain cell, a glial cell) and account for 38% of
primary brain tumors; oligodendroglial tumors begin in oligodendrocytes, another
type of glial cell, and account for 27% of primary brain tumors; mixed gliomas, a
tumor with two types of cells (oligodendrocytes and astrocytes) called an oligoastrocytoma; ependymal tumors, begin in cells that line the fluid filled spaces in the
CNS; medulloblastoma is a type of embryonal tumor, most common in children
and young adults; pineal parenchymal tumors from in parenchymal cells that make
up the pineal gland (produces melatonin, a hormone that controls the daily circadian cycle); meningiomas form in the layers of tissue that cover the brain and
­spinal cord and account for 79% of primary spinal tumors; germ cell tumors form
in germ cells (sperm or ova); and craniopharyngioma, a rare tumor that usually
forms just above the pituitary gland. Brain tumors rarely metastasize to distant
areas outside the CNS [9, 10].
Brain and other CNS cancer is relatively rare, and is the 10th leading cause of
cancer death. This cancer type is slightly more common in men. There are few
known risk factors for brain and CNS cancer, however, exposure to vinyl chloride,
Epstein–Barr virus infection, and acquired immune deficient syndrome following
organ transplants are associated with brain and other CNS cancer. Approximately
0.6% of men and women will be diagnosed with brain and other CNS cancer d­ uring
their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 58 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of brain and other nervous
system cancer is 6.4 per 100 000 men and women per year, and 116 039 people,
respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality
­(cancer deaths) of brain and other nervous system cancer is 23 880 and 16 830,
respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all brain and other CNS cancer cases
­combined is 33.2%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is shown in Table 3. Over the past 10 years, the incidence
of brain and other nervous system cancer has been declining, on average 0.2% per
year. However, in the same time frame, the mortality of brain and other nervous
system cancer has been increasing, on average 0.4% per year (Figure 3) [11].
Thyroid Cancer
The most common primary thyroid cancers are papillary tumors, followed by follicular tumors. Both tumors, being well differentiated, are highly treatable and
usually curable. The remaining, less common, thyroid cancers are medullary and
anaplastic tumors, which are poorly differentiated and aggressive [12].

176

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

T a b l e 3. Brain and nervous system cancer stages:
­distribution and five‐year relative survival.
Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

5‐year
survival (%)

77
15
2
5

36.2
20.4
32.7
27.3

Local – cancer is confined to the brain/nervous system.
Regional ‐cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the brain/nervous
system.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the brain/nervous system.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

8
7

New cases

6
5

Deaths

4
3
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
22.8%
24.7%
33.3%
34.8%
34.0%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both Sexes. Rates are Age-adjusted

Figure 3. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of brain
and nervous system cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence &
5‐year Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both
sexes. Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Thyroid cancer is fairly common, representing almost 3.1% of all new cancers.
Risk factors for thyroid cancer include excessive exposure to radiation, female
gender, and a positive family history. Approximately 1.2% of men and women will
be diagnosed with thyroid cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis
is 51 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of thyroid cancer, based on
the 2011–2015 SEER data, is 14.5 per 100 000 men and women per year, and
765 547 people, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and
mortality (cancer deaths) of thyroid cancer is 53 990 and 2060 respectively.

177

Common Can c er T yp es

The overall five‐year survival rate of all thyroid cancer cases combined is 98.1%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative ­survival is
shown in Table 4. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality of thyroid cancer
has been increasing, on average 3.1% and 0.7% per year, respectively (Figure 4) [13].
Bone and Joint Cancer
The most common type of primary bone and joint cancer is osteosarcoma, which
originates in the osteoid and forms hard, bone tissue, followed by chondrosarcoma,
which originates in the cartilaginous tissue, and Ewing sarcoma, which can
T a b l e 4. Thyroid cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer

Patients diagnosed in
stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

67
27
4
2

99.9
98.0
55.5
89.1

Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Local – cancer is confined to the thyroid gland.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the thyroid gland.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the thyroid gland.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

15
10
New cases
5
Deaths
0
1975
1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
92.3%
92.6%
95.8%
97.3%
98.1%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both Sexes. Rates are Age-adjusted

Figure 4. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of ­thyroid
cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

178

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

o­ riginate in both osteoid and cartilaginous tissue. Uncommon types include chordomas and malignant fibrous histiocytomas [14, 15].
Bone and joint cancer is rare, as it represents 0.2% of all new cancer cases in the
United States. Osteosarcoma is most common in teenagers. Ewing sarcoma is most
common in teenagers and young adults.
Bone cancers are more common in males and in the Caucasian race. Risk factors
for bone cancer include certain inherited genetic syndromes, Paget’s disease of the
bone (a precancerous condition), and a history of radiation therapy. Approximately
0.1% of men and women will be diagnosed with bone and joint cancer during their
lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 42 years.
The incidence (new cases) of bone cancer is 0.9 per 100 000 men and women
per year. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer
deaths) of bone and joint cancer is 3450 and 1590, respectively.
The five‐year overall survival of bone and joint cancer is 66.9%. Over the past
10 years, the incidence of bone and joint cancer has been increasing, on average
0.4% per year. However, in the same timeframe, the mortality of bone and joint
cancer has been declining, on average 0.3% per year (Figure 5) [16].
Lung and Bronchus Cancer
Lung and bronchus cancer has two main categories: non‐small cell cancer and
small cell cancer. Non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is any type of epithelial
lung cancer other than small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The most common types of

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

1.0

0.5

New cases

Deaths

0.0
1975
Year
5-year
survival

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

1975

1985

1995

2005

2010

52.2%

56.4%

69.3%

70.9%

66.7%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both Sexes. Rates are Age-adjusted

Figure 5. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of bone
and joint cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes.
Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

179

Common Can c er T yp es

NSCLC are squamous cell carcinoma (25%), large cell carcinoma (10%), and
adenocarcinoma (40%). SCLC accounts for approximately 15% of all lung
­
and bronchus cancers and is classified into small cell carcinoma, combined small
cell carcinoma, and neuroendocrine tumors [17, 18].
Lung and bronchus cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer, and
it is the leading cause of cancer death among men and women. Lung cancer is
more common in men and particularly in African American men. Risk factors for
lung cancer include smoking, exposure to several environmental pollutants, and a
history of radiation therapy to the breast or chest. Approximately 6.2% of men and
women will be diagnosed with lung and bronchus cancer during their lifetime; the
median age at diagnosis is 70 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of lung and bronchus
­cancer is 54.6 per 100 000 men and women per year, and 541 035 people, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer
deaths) of lung and bronchus cancer is 234 030 and 154 050, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all lung and bronchus cancer cases
­combined is 18.6%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is shown in Table 5. Over the past 10 years, the incidence
and mortality of lung and bronchus cancer has been declining, on average 2.1 and
2.7% per year, respectively (Figure 6) [19].
Head and Neck Cancer
Oral Cavity and Pharynx Cancer
The pharynx is the part of the throat that is behind the nasal and oral cavities and
above the esophagus and voice box. The oropharynx is the part of the pharynx on
the level of the oral cavity. Most oral cavity and pharynx cancers start in the squamous cells that line the lips and oral cavity. Leukoplakia (a white patch that does

T a b l e 5. Lung and bronchus cancer stages: distribution and
five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

16
22
57
5

56.3
29.7
4.7
7.8

Local – cancer is confined to the lung/bronchus.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the lung/bronchus.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the lung/bronchus.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.

180

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

80
70

New cases

60
50
40

Deaths

30
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
11.4%
13.1%
14.5%
17.4%
19.3%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both Sexes. Rates are Age-adjusted

Figure 6. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of lung
and bronchus cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes.
Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

not rub off), erythroplakia (a smooth, red patch), and the mixed forms, erythroleukoplakia, are precursors to oral cancer. Most oropharyngeal cancers are squamous
cell carcinomas. Other oropharyngeal cancers are minor salivary gland tumors,
lymphomas, and lymphoepitheliomas [20, 21].
Oral cancer is relatively rare. It is more common in men. Risk factors include a
history of heavy tobacco and alcohol use and infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV). Approximately 1.2% of men and women will be diagnosed with oral
cavity and pharynx cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is
63 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of oral cavity and pharynx
cancer is 11.3 per 100 000 men and women per year, and 359 718 people, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer
deaths) of oral cavity and pharynx cancer is 51 540 and 10 030, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all oral cavity and pharyngeal cancer cases
combined is 64.8%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is shown in Table 6. Over the past 10 years, the incidence
of oral cavity and pharynx cancer has been increasing, on average 0.7% per year.
However, in the same timeframe, the mortality of oral cavity and pharynx cancer
has been stable (Figure 7) [22].
Larynx Cancer
Most laryngeal cancers originate from squamous cells, which are the cells that line
the inside of the larynx. The larynx is the respiratory part of the throat, also called
voice box [23].

181

Common Can c er T yp es

T a b l e 6. Oral cavity and pharyngeal cancer stages: ­distribution
and five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

29
47
20
   4

83.7
65.0
39.1
49.2

Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Local – cancer is confined to the oral cavity and pharynx.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the oral cavity and
pharynx.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the oral cavity and pharynx.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

15

New cases

10
5
Deaths
0
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
52.7%
54.4%
58.5%
63.9%
68.8%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both Sexes. Rates are Age-adjusted

Figure 7. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of oral
cavity and pharyngeal cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence
& 5‐year Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both
sexes. Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Larynx cancer is relatively rare. It is more common with older age and in men.
Risk factors for laryngeal cancer include smoking, alcohol consumption, and
development of squamous cell cancers in the upper airway. Approximately 0.3% of
men and women will be diagnosed with larynx cancer during their lifetime; the
median age at diagnosis is 65 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of larynx cancer is 3.0 per
100 000 men and women per year, and 99 756 people, respectively. In 2018, the
estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of larynx cancer
is 13 150, and 3710, respectively.

182

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

The overall five‐year survival rate of all laryngeal cancer cases combined is 60.9%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is
shown in Table 7. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality of larynx cancer
has been declining, on average 2.4% and 2.3% per year, respectively (Figure 8) [24].
Gastrointestinal Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Most primary colon cancers are adenocarcinomas (mucinous or Signet ring), meaning that they originate in the epithelial tissue that lines the cavity of the colon. Most
T a b l e 7. Laryngeal cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

5‐year survival (%)

55
23
19
3

77.5
45.6
33.5
54.6

Local – cancer is confined to the larynx.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the larynx.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the larynx.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

6

New cases

4
2

Deaths

0
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
63.2%
67.4%
66.1%
65.7%
60.4%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both sexes. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 8. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of laryngeal cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

183

Common Can c er T yp es

rectal cancers are adenocarcinomas as well. The remaining 2–5% of colorectal cancers are carcinoid tumors, lymphomas, neuroendocrine, and other tumors [25, 26].
Colorectal cancer is the fourth most commonly diagnosed cancer, and the
­second leading cause of cancer death. It is more common in men and in those of
African American race. Strong risk factors for colorectal cancer include hereditary
conditions, a positive family history, and a history of a gynecologic cancer.
Approximately 4.2% of men and women will be diagnosed with colorectal cancer
during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 67 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of colorectal cancer is 39.4
per 100 000 men and women per year, and 1 332 085 people, respectively. In 2018,
the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of colorectal
cancer is 140 250, and 50 630, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all colorectal cancer cases combined is
64.5%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 8. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality of
colorectal cancer have been declining, on average 2.6 and 2.4% per year, respectively (Figure 9) [27].
Pancreatic Cancer
More than 90% of primary pancreatic cancers are adenocarcinomas, arising from
the exocrine portion of the pancreas, where the digestive enzymes are produced.
Other types include acinar cell carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, cystadenocarcinoma, and including several other types [28].
Pancreatic cancer is rare, however it is the third leading cause of cancer deaths.
It is more common with advancing age, and slightly more common in men. Risk
factors for pancreatic cancer include a positive family history, cigarette smoking,
obesity, and chronic pancreatitis (inflammation of pancreas). Approximately 1.6%
of men and women will be diagnosed with pancreatic cancer during their lifetime;
the median age at diagnosis is 70 years.

Local – cancer is confined to the colon/rectum.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the colon/rectum.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the colon/rectum.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.


Figure 9. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of colorectal cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

T a b l e 9. Pancreatic cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)
10
29
52
8

5‐year survival (%)
34.3
11.5
2.7
5.5

Local – cancer is confined to the pancreas.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the pancreas.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the pancreas.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.

The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of pancreatic cancer is
12.6 per 100 000 men and women per year, and 68 615 people, respectively. In
2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of
pancreatic cancer is 55 440 and 44 330, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all pancreatic cancer cases combined is
8.5%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 9. Over the past 10 years, both the incidence and mortality of pancreatic cancer have been stable (Figure 10) [29].

Figure 10. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of pancreatic cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Liver and Intrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer
About 90% of primary liver cancers are hepatocellular carcinomas. The remaining
tumor types include intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma
with fibrolamellar variant, and mixed hepatocellular carcinoma [30, 31].
Liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer is relatively rare. However, it is the fifth
leading cause of cancer death. It is more common in men and in Asian/Pacific
Islander and American Indian/Alaska Native populations. Risk factors for liver and
intrahepatic bile duct cancer include any chronic liver disease, such as cirrhosis,
hepatitis B or C virus, alcoholic cirrhosis, fatty liver disease, and hemochromatosis. Approximately 1.0% of men and women will be diagnosed with liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is
64 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of liver and intrahepatic
bile duct cancer is 8.8 per 100 000 men and women per year, and 71 990 people,
respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer is 42 220 and 30 200,
respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer
cases combined is 17.7%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and
­corresponding relative survival is shown in Table 10. Over the past 10 years, the
incidence and mortality of liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer has been increasing, on average 2.6 and 2.5% per year, respectively (Figure 11) [32].

186

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

T a b l e 10. Liver and intrahepatic bile duct cancer stages:
distribution and five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer


Local – cancer is confined to the liver/intrahepatic bile duct.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the liver/
intrahepatic bile duct.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the liver/intrahepatic bile
duct.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival


Figure 11. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of liver
and intrahepatic duct cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence &
5‐year Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both
sexes. Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Stomach Cancer
More than 90% of primary stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas, meaning that
they originate in the epithelial tissue that lines the cavity of the stomach. There are
two major types of gastric adenocarcinoma, intestinal, and diffuse. Intestinal adenocarcinomas are well differentiated (more uniform and organized), whereas diffuse
adenocarcinomas are poorly differentiated (disordered and poorly organized) [33].
Stomach cancer is relatively rare, and the 15th leading cause of cancer death. It
is more common in men and in non‐Caucasian races. Risk factors for stomach

187

Common Can c er T yp es

cancer include helicobacter pylori (a bacteria found in the stomach) gastric infection, advanced age, and a positive family history. Approximately 0.8% of men and
women will be diagnosed with stomach cancer during their lifetime; the median
age at diagnosis is 68 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of stomach cancer is 7.2
per 100 000 men and women per year, and 97 915 people, respectively. In 2018, the
estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of stomach
­cancer is 26 240 and 10 800, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all stomach cancer cases combined is 31.0%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is
shown in Table 11. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality of stomach cancer
have been declining, on average 1.5 and 2.3% per year, respectively (Figure 12) [34].
T a b l e 11. Stomach cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Local – cancer is confined to the stomach.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the stomach.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the stomach.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival


Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

Esophagus Cancer
More than 50% of primary esophageal cancers are adenocarcinomas, meaning that
they originate in the epithelial tissue that lines the esophagus. Esophageal adenocarcinomas are associated with Barrett’s esophagus, a premalignant condition
characterized by replacement of the epithelial lining, from one cell type to another
(stratified squamous to simple columnar), located in the lower esophagus. The
remaining esophageal cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, usually located in
the upper esophagus [35].
Esophageal cancer is relatively rare. It is more common in men, and in advanced
age. Risk factors include heavy alcohol use and tobacco use. Approximately 0.5%
of men and women will be diagnosed with esophageal cancer during their lifetime;
the median age at diagnosis is 68 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of esophageal cancer is 4.0
per 100 000 men and women per year, and 47 284 people, respectively. In 2018, the
estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of esophageal
cancer is 17 290 and 15 850, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all esophagus cancer cases combined is
19.2%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 12. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality
of esophageal cancer have been declining, on average 1.2 and 0.9% per year,
respectively (Figure 13) [36].
Small Intestine Cancer
Of the primary cancers 25–50% in the small intestine are adenocarcinomas, meaning that they originate in the epithelial tissue that lines the cavity of the small
intestine. Other types of small intestine cancer include sarcoma, carcinoid tumor,
gastrointestinal stromal tumor, and lymphoma. Combined these tumors account
for 1–2% of all gastrointestinal cancers [37].
T a b l e 12. Esophagus cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)
19
32
39
10

5‐year survival (%)
45.2
23.6
4.8
12.0

Local – cancer is confined to the esophagus.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the esophagus.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the esophagus.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.

189

Common Can c er T yp es

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival
Number Per
100,000 Persons

6
New cases
4
Deaths
2
0
1975
Year
5-year
survival

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

1975

1985

1995

2005

2010

4.0%

8.6%

11.6%

18.9%

22.4%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both sexes. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 13. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of esophageal cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Compared to other cancers, small intestine cancer is relatively rare. It is slightly
more common among men than women. Risk factors include high fat diet and
­having a health history of Crohn’s disease, celiac disease, or familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP). Approximately 0.3% of men and women will be diagnosed with
small intestine cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 66 years.
The incidence (new cases) of small intestinal cancer is 2.3 per 100 000 men and
women per year. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality
(cancer deaths) of small intestine cancer is 10 470 and 1450, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all small intestinal cancer cases combined
is 67.6%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is shown in Table 13. Over the past 10 years, the incidence of small
intestine cancer has been increasing, on average 2.3% per year. However, in the
same timeframe, the mortality of oral cavity and pharynx cancer has been stable
(Figure 14) [38].
Anus Cancer
The majority of anal cancers are HPV‐associated squamous cell carcinomas, which
originate from in epithelial tissue that lines the anal canal. Basaloid transitional
cell tumors account for most of the remainder, which are located internally and
close to the rectum. Adenocarcinomas originating from anal glands and anal fistulas are rare [39].
Compared to other cancers anal cancer is rare. It is slightly more common in women.
A strong risk factor for anal cancer is HPV infection. Other risk factors include s­ moking

190

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

T a b l e 13. Small Intestine cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

5‐year survival (%)

32
35
27
7

85.0
74.6
42.1
51.2

Local – cancer is confined to the small intestine.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the small intestine.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the small intestine.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

3
2
New cases
1
Deaths
0
1975
1985

1995
Year
1995

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
2005
2010
5-year
32.8%
39.0%
53.5%
66.6%
68.9%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both sexes. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 14. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of small
intestinal cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes.
Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

and aging. Approximately 0.2% of men and women will be diagnosed with ­stomach
cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 62 years.
The incidence (new cases) of anal cancer is 1.8 per 100 000 men and women per
year. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer
deaths) of anus cancer is 8580 and 1160, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all anal cancer cases combined is 67.4%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative ­survival
is shown in Table 14. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality of anus
cancer have been increasing, on average 2.2 and 2.9% per year, respectively
(Figure 15) [40].

191

Common Can c er T yp es

T a b l e 14. Anal cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

48
32
13
7

81.5
63.9
29.8
57.4

Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Local – cancer is confined to the anus.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the anus.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the anus.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival
Number Per
100,000 Persons

2.0
1.5
New cases
1.0
0.5
Deaths
0.0
1975
1985
Year
5-year
survival

1995
Year

2005

2015

1975

1985

1995

2005

2010

64.3%

58.1%

63.6%

37.7%

72.5%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both sexes. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 15. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of anal
cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Urologic Cancers
Prostate Cancer
More than 95% of primary prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas, meaning that
they originate in the epithelial tissue that lines the cavity of the prostate gland.
Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) (collections of irregular cells within the
epithelial tissue of the prostate gland) is often present with adenocarcinoma and in
its advanced stage may be a precursor of the cancer. The remaining 5% of primary
prostate cancers consist of small‐cell tumors, intralobular acinar carcinomas,
ductal carcinomas, clear cell carcinomas, and mucinous carcinomas [41].

192

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

T a b l e 15. Prostate cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)
78
12
5
4

5‐year survival (%)
100
100
30.0
80.9

Local – cancer is confined to the prostate.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the prostate.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the prostate.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.

Prostate cancer is the most frequent non‐dermatologic cancer in men, and is the
second leading cause of cancer death in men, following lung cancer. Strong risk
factors for prostate cancer include a positive family history and African American
race. Approximately 11.2% of men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during
their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 66 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of prostate cancer is 112.6
per 100 000 men per year, and 3 120 176 men, respectively. In 2018, the estimated
total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of prostate cancer is
164 690, and 29 430, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all prostate cancer cases combined is
98.2%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 15. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality
of prostate cancer has been declining, on average 5.7 and 2.9% per year, respectively (Figure 16) [42].
Bladder Cancer
More than 90% of primary bladder cancers are transitional cell carcinomas, meaning they originate in the transitional cells (cells that can contract and expand) in the
lining of the bladder. Other primary bladder cancers include about 2–7% squamous
cell carcinomas, meaning they originate from squamous cells found in the lining of
the bladder, and 2% adenocarcinomas that originate from glandular (secretory)
cells in the lining of the bladder [43].
Bladder cancer is the sixth most commonly diagnosed cancer, and it is the ninth
leading cause of cancer death. Risk factors for bladder cancer include male gender,
Caucasian race, and increasing age. Approximately 2.3% of men and women will
be diagnosed with bladder cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis
is 72 years.

193

Common Can c er T yp es

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

250
200
150

New cases

100
50

Deaths

0
1975

1985

1995
Year
1995

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
2005
2010
5-year
66.0%
75.0%
95.7%
99.2%
99.5%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Males. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 16. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of prostate cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, males. Rates are age‐
adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of bladder cancer, is 19.5
per 100 000 men and women per year, and 708 444 people, respectively. In 2018,
the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of bladder
cancer is 81 190 and 17 240 respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all bladder cancer cases combined is
76.8%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 16. Over the past 10 years, the incidence of bladder
­cancer has been decreasing, on average 1.0% per year. However, in the same
­timeframe, the mortality of bladder cancer has been stable (Figure 17) [44].
T a b l e 16. Bladder cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Stage of cancer
In situ
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)
51
34
7
4
3

5‐year survival (%)
95.4
69.4
34.9
4.8
46.0

In situ – abnormal, non‐invasive cells: pre‐cancer.
Local – cancer is confined to the bladder.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the bladder.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the bladder.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
* Stage distribution percentages do not sum to 100 due to rounding.

194

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

25
20

New cases

15
10
5

Deaths

0
1975
Year
5-year
survival

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

1975

1985

1995

2005

2010

71.5%

76.0%

81.1%

80.1%

77.3%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both sexes. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 17. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of bladder cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Kidney Cancer
Up to 85% of primary kidney cancers are renal cell carcinomas, or renal adenocarcinomas, which originate in the renal tubules where the blood is filtered and waste
is removed – creating urine. About 7% of primary kidney cancers are transitional
cell carcinomas of the renal pelvis, where the urine is collected. The remaining
primary kidney cancers consist of several uncommon tumors, including the Wilms
tumor, or nephroblastoma, cancers that typically occur in childhood [45, 46].
Kidney cancer is the eighth most commonly diagnosed cancer, it represents
3.8% of all new cancers diagnosed. Risk factors for kidney cancer include female
gender and race; it is more common in African Americans, American Indian, and
Alaska Native populations. Approximately 1.7% of men and women will be
­diagnosed with kidney cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is
64 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of renal cancer, based on
the 2011–2015 SEER data, is 15.9 per 100 000 men and women per year, and
505 380 people, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and
mortality (cancer deaths) of kidney cancer is 65 340 and 14 970, respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all kidney cancer cases combined is 74.5%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative survival is shown in Table 17. Over the past 10 years, the incidence of kidney cancer
has been increasing, on average 0.6% per year. However, in the same timeframe,
the mortality of kidney cancer has been decreasing, on average 0.7% per year
(Figure 18) [47].

195

Common Can c er T yp es

T a b l e 17. Kidney cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

5‐year survival (%)

65
16
16
3

92.6
68.7
11.6
38.0

Local – cancer is confined to the kidney.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the kidney.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the kidney.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival
Number Per
100,000 Persons

20
15
10
5

New cases
Deaths

0
1975
Year
5-year
survival

1985
1975

52.1%

1995
Year
1985
1995

55.3%

61.4%

2005

2015

2005

2010

74.5%

74.7%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Both sexes. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 18. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of kidney
and renal pelvis cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All races, both sexes.
Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Testicular Cancer
Most testicular cancers are germ cell tumors, meaning that they originate in the
cells that make sperm. Germ cell tumors may be either seminomas or nonseminomas, with nonseminomas further subdivided into embryonal carcinomas, yolk sac
tumors, choriocarcinomas, teratomas, and mixed germ cell tumors.
Both seminomas and nonseminomas are highly treatable; the cure rate for seminomas is >90%, while for nonseminomas it approaches 100% [48].
Testicular cancer is most common in young or middle‐aged men. Testicular
cancer is more common in Caucasian men, followed by American Indian/Alaska
Native, and then Hispanic men. Risk factors for testicular cancer include

196

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

c­ ryptorchidism (an undescended testis) or a positive family history. Approximately
0.4% of men will be diagnosed with testicular cancer during their lifetime; the
median age at diagnosis is 33 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of testicular cancer, based
on the 2011–2015 SEER data, is 5.7 per 100 000 men per year, and 257 823 men,
respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality
­(cancer deaths) of testicular cancer is 9310 and 400 respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all testicular cancer cases combined is
95.3%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 18. Over the past 10 years, the incidence testicular c­ ancer
has been increasing, on average 0.8% per year. However, in the same timeframe,
the mortality of testicular cancer has been stable (Figure 19) [49].
T a b l e 1 8 . Testicular cancer stages: distribution and
five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

68
19
12
1

99.2
96.0
73.7
79.7

Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Local – cancer is confined to the testicle.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the testicle.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the testicle.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.

Number Per
100,000 Persons

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival
6
New cases
4
2
Deaths
0
1975
Year
5-year
survival

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

1975

1985

1995

2005

2010

80.0%

92.5%

96.3%

96.8%

97.0%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Males. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 19. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of
t­esticular cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, males. Rates
are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

197

Common Can c er T yp es

Gynecologic Cancers
Endometrial Uterine Cancer
Endometrial cancer originates in the lining of the uterus. Approximately 75% of primary endometrial cancers are endometrioid cancers, which are adenocarcinomas. The
remaining, less common, endometrial cancers consist of uterine papillary serous
(<10%), mucinous (1%), clear cell (4%), squamous cell (<1%), and mixed (10%) [50].
Endometrial cancer is the ninth most commonly diagnosed cancer, which makes
it the most common gynecologic cancer. Risk factors for endometrial cancer
include obesity, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Approximately 2.9% of
women will be diagnosed with endometrial cancer during their lifetime; the median
age at diagnosis is 62 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of endometrial cancer,
based on the 2011–2015 SEER data, is 26.0 per 100 000 women per year, and
727 200 women, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and
mortality (cancer deaths) of endometrial cancer is 63 230 and 11 350 respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all endometrial cancer cases combined is
81.1%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 19. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality
of endometrial cancer have been increasing, on average 1.3 and 1.6% per year,
respectively (Figure 20) [51].
Ovarian Cancer
The most common ovarian cancers are epithelial tumors that originate in the tissue
covering the ovary. Germ cell tumors, which originate in the germ (egg) cells, are
less common. Ovarian low malignant potential tumors have abnormal cells that
may become a precursor to ovarian cancer [52, 53].
Ovarian cancer is relatively rare, representing about 1.3% of new cancers. The
main risk factor for ovarian cancer is a positive family history. Approximately
T a b l e 19. Endometrial cancer stages: distribution and
five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

67
21
9
3

94.9
68.6
16.3
52.0

Local – cancer is confined to the uterus.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the uterus.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the uterus.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.

198

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

40

New cases

30
20
10

Deaths

0
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
87.8%
82.8%
84.1%
82.9%
83.4%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Females. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 20. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of
­ terine cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
u
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, females. Rates are
age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

1.3% of women will be diagnosed with ovarian cancer during their lifetime; the
median age at diagnosis is 63 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of ovarian cancer, based on
the 2011–2015 SEER data, is 11.6 per 100 000 women per year, and 224 940
women, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases and mortality (cancer deaths) of ovarian cancer is 22 240 and 14 070 respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all ovarian cancer cases combined is
47.4%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 20. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality
of ovarian cancer have been declining, on average 1.5 and 2.3% per year, respectively (Figure 21) [54].
T a b l e 20. Ovarian cancer stages: distribution and
five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

15
20
59
6

92.3
74.5
29.2
24.8

Local – cancer is confined to the ovary.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the ovary.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the ovary.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.

199

Common Can c er T yp es

New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival
20
Number Per
100,000 Persons

New cases
15
10

Deaths

5
0
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
33.6%
38.7%
42.2%
44.7%
46.8%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Females. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 21. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of
ovarian cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, females.
Rates are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Cervical Uterus Cancer
Most cervical cancers originate at the squamous‐columnar junction, the transition
zone between squamous cells on the outer cervix (about 90%) and columnar, glandular cells on the inner cervix (10%). Therefore, cervical cancer can involve squamous cells, glandular cells, or both. Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN),
(irregular cells in the tissue lining the cervix) or adenocarcinoma in situ, may be a
precursor of the cancer [55].
Compared to other cancers, cervical cancer is relatively rare. Risk factors
for cervical cancer include HPV infection, high parity, smoking, and long‐
term oral contraceptives. Approximately 0.6% of women will be diagnosed
with cervical cancer during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is
50 years.
The incidence (new cases) and prevalence (all cases) of cervical cancer,
based on the 2011–2015 SEER data, is 7.4 per 100 000 women per year, and
257 524 women, respectively. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases
and mortality (cancer deaths) of cervical cancer is 13 240 and 4170
respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all cervical cancer cases combined is
66.2%. The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative
survival is shown in Table 21. Over the past 10 years, the incidence of cervical
cancer has been stable. However, in the same time frame, the mortality of cervical
cancer has been declining, on average 0.7% per year (Figure 22) [56].

200

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

Ta b l e 2 1 . Cervical cancer stages: distribution and
five‐year relative survival.
Stage of cancer

Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

5‐year survival (%)

45
36
15
4

91.7
56.0
17.2
50.0

Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

Local – cancer is confined within the cervix.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the cervix.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the cervix.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

15

New cases

10
5

Deaths

0
1975

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

Year
1975
1985
1995
2005
2010
5-year
68.1%
66.5%
74.9%
68.2%
69.1%
survival
SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Females. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 22. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of
cervical cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year
Relative Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, females. Rates
are age‐adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

Vulvar Cancer
About 90% of vulvar cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, meaning they originate in the epithelial lining of the vagina. Vulvar cancer most often affects the outer
vaginal lips. Less often, cancer affects the inner vaginal lips, clitoris, or vaginal
glands. Vulvar cancer usually forms slowly over a number of years. Abnormal cells
can grow on the surface of the vulvar skin for a long time. Vulvar intraepithelial
neoplasia (VIN), irregular cells in the tissue lining the cervix, may be a precursor
of the cancer [57].
Compared to other cancers, vulvar cancer is rare. Risk factors for vulvar cancer
include VIN, HPV infection, and genital warts. Approximately 0.3% of women

201

Common Can c er T yp es

will be diagnosed with cervical cancer during their lifetime; the median age at
diagnosis is 68 years.
The incidence (new cases) of vulvar cancer, based on the 2011–2015 SEER data,
is 2.5 per 100 000 women per year. In 2018, the estimated total number of new cases
and mortality (cancer deaths) of cervical cancer is 6190 and 1200 respectively.
The overall five‐year survival rate of all vulvar cancer cases combined is 71%.
The distribution of cases over the disease stages and corresponding relative ­survival
is shown in Table 22. Over the past 10 years, the incidence and mortality of vulvar
cancer have been increasing, on average 0.6 and 1.2% per year, respectively
(Figure 23) [58].
T a b l e 22. Vulvar cancer stages: distribution and five‐year
relative survival.
Patients diagnosed
in stage (%)

Stage of cancer
Local
Regional
Distant
Un‐staged

5‐year survival (%)

59
30
6
5

86.3
53.3
18.6
58.7

Local – cancer is confined within the vulva.
Regional – cancer is spread outside of but remains close to the vulva.
Distant – cancer is outside of and distant from the vulva.
Un‐staged – cancer stage is unknown.
New Cases, Deaths, and 5-year Relative Survival

Number Per
100,000 Persons

3
New cases
2
1

Deaths

0
1975
Year
5-year
survival

1985

1995
Year

2005

2015

1975

1985

1995

2005

2010

75.1%

70.4%

71.8%

76.4%

71.9%

SEER 9 Incidence & U.S. Mortality 1975–2015, All Races,
Females. Rates are Age-Adjusted

Figure 23. Graph shows 40‐year trends of new cases (light gray) and deaths (dark gray) of vulvar
cancer. Table shows five‐year survival by year. Data from SEER 9 Incidence & 5‐year Relative
Survival Percent from 1975–2010, and U.S. Mortality 1975–2015. All Races, females. Rates are age‐
adjusted. Source: https://www.cancer.gov

202

Classific ation of T umors, Their Frequenc y and Progression

Hematologic Cancers
Leukemia
Leukemia begins in the blood‐forming tissue, such as the bone marrow, and causes
large numbers of abnormal blood cells to be produced. The abnormal blood cells
have an extended lifespan, and may overwhelm the normal blood cells and prevent
them from fulfilling their functions, such as transporting oxygen to tissues,
­controlling bleeding and fighting infections. The four main types of leukemia are Non‐Hodgkin lymphoma is the seventh most commonly diagnosed cancer, and
is the eighth leading cause of cancer death. It is more common in men, advanced
age, and among the Caucasian race. Risk factors for non‐Hodgkin lymphoma
include inherited immune disorders, autoimmune disease, Epstein–Barr virus, and
taking immunosuppressant drugs after an organ transplant. Approximately 2.1% of
men and women will be diagnosed with non‐Hodgkin lymphoma during their lifetime; the median age at diagnosis is 67 years.
Pediatric Oncology
The most common cancers in children (0–14 years) include leukemia (31%), brain
and other CNS cancer (26%), neuroblastoma (6%), and non‐Hodgkin lymphoma
(5%). In adolescents (15–19 years), the most common cancers include brain and
other CNS cancer (22%), leukemia (13%), thyroid cancer (11%), Hodgkin
­lymphoma (11%), and gonadal germ cell tumors (10%) [67].
Cancer is the second leading cause of death in children aged 5–14 years, following accidents. White children have the highest incidence (new cases) of childhood
cancers; African American children have the lowest cancer incidence. American
Indian/Alaska Native children have the lowest cancer mortality (deaths) of all
racial/ethnic groups. Unlike many adult cancers, childhood and adolescent cancer
incidence is not consistently higher among populations with lower socioeconomic
status. Risk factors for childhood cancer include ionizing radiation, both high and
low birth weights, and parental smoking [68].
The incidence (new cases) of childhood cancer, based on the 1975–2015 SEER
data, is 177.2 per 1 000 000 per year. The prevalence of childhood cancer in children and adolescents (0–20 years), in 2015, was 118 794. The total number of people (of all ages) alive in 2015 that have been diagnosed with childhood cancer is
359 890. The top three cancers among childhood cancer survivors are ALL, brain
and other CNS cancers, and lymphoma [67].
Childhood cancers are most often treated with chemotherapy and sometimes
radiation, and both therapies can have long‐term effects. Children should have
­follow‐up care to assess for short‐ and long‐term complications, late effects of
therapy, and to detect recurrent and secondary cancers. For example, children who
received chest irradiation have an increased risk for lung cancer, which will
increase 20‐fold if there is also a history of smoking [69].


Introduction
This chapter introduces basic cancer epidemiology and related areas of clinical
research. Our goal is to provide the lay reader with a foundational understanding
of research concepts that will help make the cancer‐research literature, as well as
other chapters in this book, more accessible.
The field of cancer epidemiology encompasses many facets of scientific
­exploration, but the most important one is the ascertainment of factors that are
associated with cancer risk. There are many examples. Smoking and asbestos
exposure have been linked to lung cancer. Certain diets have been associated with
colorectal cancer. Family history has been linked to colorectal cancer and breast
cancer. Specific genes have been identified as predictors of breast cancer risk.
Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, Treatment and Recovery, Second Edition. Edited by Gary S. Stein
and Kimberly P. Luebbers.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

213

214

Cancer E pidemiology: I dentifying Canc er R isk

By ascertaining risk factors for disease, medical practitioners and public health
officials are able to better control the disease by promoting lifestyles that avoid
known risk factors, or by identifying people who have an elevated risk of developing cancer, making it more likely that the disease can be detected earlier and thus
more‐successfully treated.
Notice right away that we use the words “are associated with” rather than the
stronger term “cause.” The reason for this is that proving a causal relationship is
often very difficult or impossible in an observational study (as opposed to an
­interventional study). Smoking provides an excellent example. We may say that
smoking causes lung cancer because we have decades of data from a variety of
sources that all point to a causal relationship. However, this was not always so
clear, and for many years smoking was considered safe. Even after seeing increases
in cancers among smokers, many still doubted that smoking was the cause. In
­epidemiology, we are often confronted with this problem. In particular, we might
see an association but not necessarily a cause for any increased risk. Nevertheless,
understanding risk factors that are associated with cancer is an important step in
developing strategies for prevention. In this chapter, we will introduce basic
­epidemiological methods that cancer researchers utilize to identify risk factors and
promote prevention and control of the disease.
A related area, also covered in this chapter, is clinical trials research, where
investigators evaluate new treatments for cancer in an interventional study.
Specifically, we discuss the randomized clinical trial, which is widely considered
to be the best tool available for determining the effectiveness of experimental
treatments.

Primary and Secondary Prevention
Prevention of cancer is a national priority in the United States. There are two
overarching strategies that are employed. These are primary and secondary prevention. Primary prevention is focused on minimizing cancer risk among people
who have never had the disease. Examples of interventions along these lines
include educational initiatives to reduce cancer risk (e.g., weight reduction,
smoking cessation, exercise), and decreasing or eliminating exposure to hazardous materials that have been linked to cancer. The goal of secondary prevention
is to lessen the risk of cancer recurrence or progression in people with cancer or
a history of cancer. Cancer screening is a key strategy for secondary prevention.
The goal of screening is to detect cancers earlier in their development, when
they can be more effectively treated. Mammography and colonoscopy are two
major examples of screening procedures. Another type of secondary prevention
involves using drugs that have been shown to reduce risk. For example, low‐
dose aspirin has been shown to lower colorectal cancer risk in people with a
history of colon polyps.

Confounding and Bias

215

Confounding and Bias
Confounding and bias are the two most important sources of error in epidemiologic studies. The presence of either one can render a study uninterpretable. Cancer
epidemiologists must go to great lengths to avoid these errors in order to produce
meaningful data. Bias is a systematic error that can occur in many ways. The two
most major, potential sources of bias are in the selection of study participants
(“selection bias”) and in the way that data are collected from those participants
(“measurement bias”). For example, suppose we are interested in studying “vaping” (the use of electronic cigarettes), specifically what proportion of the population are regular users and whether usage differs between men and women. To do
this study, we visit some college campuses and randomly ask people to answer a
few questions about how often they vape. This study will be biased because the
population being sampled will be younger, better educated, and have a higher
standard of living on average than the general population. As a result, we would not
be able to use the data from this experiment to make any statements about the vaping habits of the general population, including whether vaping rates differ for
males as compared to females. However, if we had intended to study the same
question in college students, the study described above would not have suffered
from selection bias.
The way in which data are collected can also result in bias. A simple example of
measurement bias is when a piece of equipment is not properly calibrated, such as
when a scale consistently under‐reports a person’s weight. In this example, the rate
of obesity in the study population will be underestimated, as will the average body
mass index. Measurement bias is also common when the data collection relies on
human judgment or memory, such as when a patient is asked about prior risky
behaviors, or when a nurse assesses a patient’s mobility, or when a pathologist
looks at a tissue sample and renders an opinion. In each of these examples, there
may be external factors that influence the responses. A patient might underreport
drug and alcohol use to avoid the doctor’s disapproval. Mobility might be over‐ or
underestimated depending on how healthy the patient otherwise looks. Any knowledge the pathologist might have about the patient’s history, including any medications or prior illnesses, might affect her opinion about the tissue sample.
It is difficult to completely eliminate bias; however, with careful scientific technique it can be minimized to an acceptable level. Selection bias is avoided by carefully defining the study population of interest and seeking participants in such a
way that the characteristics of the participants mimic those of the population as
closely as possible. Selection bias can be completely avoided by randomly selecting participants from the general population of interest; however, such an approach
is usually not practical and may even be impossible. For one thing, we cannot force
people to participate! The next best thing is to recruit participants from sources that
are considered to be generally representative of the population. Selection bias can
also be minimized by recruiting participants from multiple and diverse settings.

216

Cancer E pidemiology: I dentifying Canc er R isk

Measurement bias can also be avoided with careful scientific technique that is
applied uniformly. All equipment used to make measurements must be regularly
calibrated. Protocols for collecting opinion‐based data (“rating”) need to be developed and tested for accuracy, including comparisons across different raters. Where
possible, “blinding” is a highly effective tool for minimizing bias. In a blinded
study, those investigators who are providing opinion‐based assessments are blinded
to some or all of the participant’s characteristics. For example, the pathologist can
be asked to render an opinion without knowing the identity of the patient from
whom the tissue sample was obtained.
Confounding is another source of error in epidemiologic studies and occurs
when an apparent association between a risk factor and disease status is actually
due to some other risk factor. Confounding can also cause the masking of a risk
factor, making it harder to detect. Age is a common confounder. Older age is probably the number one risk factor for most diseases, and therefore, before we can say
that some other risk factor is associated with disease, we first need to be sure that
age is not a confounder. Let us consider a simple hypothetical example. Suppose
we are interested in the association between climate and melanoma risk. We randomly sample people from eastern Massachusetts and southern Florida and compare the prevalence of (i.e., percent of people with) a history of melanoma. We
might see that the prevalence in southern Florida is much higher than that in eastern Massachusetts. Is this due to climate? Perhaps some of the effect is due to climate; however, we also note that the population in eastern Massachusetts is
probably somewhat younger on average when one considers that the region has a
large number of college campuses, and southern Florida is a popular retirement
destination. In this hypothetical example, the true effect of climate is confounded
by age. The actual difference in risk between the two climates is probably less than
this study would suggest. Fortunately, it is relatively straightforward to control
confounding due to age. The investigators could match participants according to
age, or if the extent of the confounding is not too severe, could use statistical
approaches to estimate the climate effect after adjusting for any age differences.
While age is almost always an important potential confounder in epidemiologic
studies, there are many other ways that confounding can result in error. Sophisticated
statistical approaches are often employed to correct for confounding; however,
these only work for confounders that have been measured. There will always be the
potential that some unknown confounder might explain an apparent association.

Statistical Analysis
Statistics plays a critically important role in epidemiology, and it is important to
understand a few of the most important statistical concepts in order to interpret the
findings of any study. We will concern ourselves in this chapter with the general
concepts rather than the details of any specific analytical method. In a nutshell, the

statistical method is concerned with differentiating a true effect or association from
random variability. Consider a simple example, where we flip a coin 10 times. If
the coin were fair, we would expect to see five heads and five tails. Of course, by
random chance, we could easily see some other outcome. Suppose we see eight
heads and two tails. Is this evidence that the coin is more likely to come up heads
rather than tails, or was the result merely random variability? Similar questions
arise in biomedical research, where we might see apparently higher risk of disease
in a subgroup of people, or we might observe that a particular medicine appears to
be more effective than others at treating a disease. Statistical analysis provides a
structured way to address these questions. The material below summarizes the key
aspects of statistical analysis, which we illustrate later in the chapter in a number
of case studies.
There are two basic modes of statistical analysis: estimation and testing.
Estimation consists of using data to best approximate an unknown characteristic
of a population. A simple example is the result of a political poll. The characteristic of interest is the percentage of voters who plan to support a particular candidate. In cancer research, we are interested in characteristics such as the percent of
women in the United States living with breast cancer (or any other oncologic
disease), or how much a new treatment prolongs life among patients diagnosed
with lung cancer.
All estimates are subject to error due to random variability, much the way that a
totally fair coin can come up heads 8 times in 10 tosses. Random variability is
often addressed by presenting the estimate along with a range of plausible values
reflecting the potential random error. In the biomedical literature, the range is
called a “confidence interval.” For example, a 95% confidence interval is expected
to capture the true population characteristic 95% of the time. In the biomedical
literature, statistics are often presented with 95% confidence intervals. The accuracy of an estimate is determined by several factors. The two most important of
these are the amount of variation in the data (i.e., how spread out the data are) and
the sample size, with larger sample sizes resulting in narrower confidence intervals
and thus more overall accuracy.
There are a great many different kinds of statistical estimates related to risk of
disease – far too many to be covered in this chapter; however, we will mention
some of the more commonly seen ones. A very common summary measure is the
relative risk. This is a ratio describing the risk in an exposed group relative to the
risk in an unexposed group. If the ratio is greater than one, it indicates that risk is
higher in the exposed group. If the ratio is less than one, it indicates that risk is
lower in the exposed group (i.e., the exposure is “protective”). There are several
forms of relative risk, referred to by terms such as risk ratio, odds ratio, hazard
ratio, and rate ratio, but the idea is the same. Relative risks are often shown with
95% confidence intervals to provide some assessment of the accuracy of the estimate. Another common summary in cancer research is actually shown in a graph
called a “survival curve,” which illustrates the percent of study participants free of
an event (e.g., disease relapse/progression or death) over the time since study


Figure 2. Basic structure of an immunoglobulin molecule. Each molecule is made up of two light
(κ or λ) (blue areas) and two heavy (purple) chains, and each chain is made up of variable (V) and
constant (C) portions, the V portions including the antigen‐binding site. The heavy chain (μ, δ, γ,
ε or α) varies according to the immunoglobulin class. IgA molecules form dimers, while IgM forms
a ring of five molecules. Papain cleaves the molecules into an Fc fragment and two Fab fragments.
Source: Hoffbrand and Moss, 2011. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley and Sons. (See insert
for color representation.)

of invading microbes (Figure 3). Each plasma cell makes a unique ­antibody that
­provides a “fingerprint,” which identifies that cell and all of its progeny.
Specific immune responses are generated in secondary lymphoid organs, including lymph nodes, the spleen, and lymphoid tissues of the digestive and respiratory
tracts (Figure 2). Lymph nodes are small, bean‐shaped organs that are clustered in
the neck, armpits, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and groin. Lymph fluid contains B and
T lymphocytes and it drains from tissues throughout the body into lymph nodes
through a spidery network of lymph vessels. Antigens from viruses and bacteria
are concentrated in lymph nodes, where they encounter lymphocytes. When B
lymphocytes recognize specific antigens, they become activated and mature within
lymph nodes to become memory B cells or antibody‐secreting plasma cells. When
T lymphocytes recognize specific antigens in the lymph nodes, they become activated and mature in the lymph node, but then enter the bloodstream to populate
sites of inflammation or infection in the body.
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and most non‐Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) are cancers
of the B lymphocytes; less commonly, NHL corresponds to T lymphocytes.
Multiple myeloma is a cancer of the plasma cells, in which one clone of malignant
plasma cells grows out of control in bone marrow and other organs.

In lymphomas, cancerous lymphocytes are mostly found in lymph nodes, but
can spread to the spleen and other secondary lymphoid tissues, and to other organs.
In leukemias, malignant cells are predominantly found in the bone marrow and
circulating blood. However, the distinction between leukemias and lymphomas
can sometimes be blurred. For example, in some cases of lymphoma, cells can be
found in the blood and bone marrow and, conversely, sometimes leukemic cells
can be found in the lymph nodes.
Leukemias, lymphomas, and myelomas make up about 10% of all new cancer
cases in the United States. Some kinds of solid tumors, e.g., breast cancer, can have
a strong pattern of inheritance, and some lung cancers are known to be caused by
smoking or other noxious agents. In contrast, hematologic malignancies are only
rarely considered familial, and no specific cause of malignant transformation is
identified for most patients affected by hematologic malignancies. However, there
is an increased association of certain types of leukemia with extensive exposure to
benzene or other organic solvents, and some lymphomas are thought to be caused
by herbicides, such as Agent Orange.
Some hematologic malignancies are associated with certain abnormalities of
chromosomes, such as loss or duplication of parts of chromosomes or entire chromosomes. In other cases, two distinct chromosomes may join to form an abnormal
“fusion” chromosome. Such abnormalities can help to confirm the identity of a particular hematologic malignancy, such as the characteristic fusion of chromosomes 9
and 22 in CML. Identification of the genes associated with such abnormal chromosomes has provided important clues about the nature of these cancers and, in many
cases, has offered new and more effective ways to treat these disorders. It is important to understand that such chromosome abnormalities arise during the lifetime of
the affected individual, and they are not generally inherited by their children.
Because hematologic malignancies arise in cells that can travel in the bloodstream,
bone marrow, and various lymphoid organs, the malignant cells may spread – even
before the cancer is discovered. Thus, in contrast to certain solid tumors in which surgery can be curative, removal of the tumor mass is only rarely able to cure a lymphoma,
leukemia, or myeloma. Rather, hematologic malignancies are generally treated with
systemic therapies, such as chemotherapy or immunotherapy, or with regional treatments, such as radiation therapy. Many hematologic malignancies are very responsive
to systemic treatments, and several types have high rates of cure. For some hematologic
malignancies, stem cell transplantation may offer an effective treatment or even cure.
There are two general categories of stem cell transplants: autologous and allogeneic. In an autologous stem cell transplant (auto transplant), the transplanted
HSCs come from the patient. This approach allows the patient to receive higher‐
dose chemotherapy than would be otherwise feasible, because higher doses of
chemotherapy may kill cancer cells more effectively, but would also severely damage the bone marrow. An auto transplant repopulates the HSCs in the bone marrow
after high‐dose chemotherapy, allowing normal, healthy blood cells to regenerate.
In an allogeneic stem cell transplant (allo transplant), the donated bone marrow
comes from another person who is genetically similar to the patient. Importantly,
in an allo transplant, the donor’s transplanted stem cells may recognize remaining

304

Leukemia, Lymphoma, and M yeloma

cancer cells as foreign and destroy them – an effect known as graft‐versus‐disease
effect. However, this comes with the potential side effect of graft‐versus‐host disease, in which the transplanted stem cells may also recognize normal cells in the
recipient as foreign and attack them, causing effects on the skin, GI tract, and other
organs.
Leukemias
Leukemias account for more than 50 000 cases per year in the United States, or
approximately 3% of all cancers. There are four major categories of leukemia, and
they differ significantly in regard to who is likely to be affected, the expected outcome (prognosis), types of treatment, and possible complications. The first factor
in classifying leukemia refers to the microscopic appearance of the leukemic cells,
i.e., do they resemble normal, mature blood cells, or do they appear more like
immature stem cells? When the cells are immature in appearance, they are described
as acute leukemia, because they typically are fast growing and will progress quickly
without treatment. In contrast, the more mature appearing cells of chronic leukemias tend to accumulate slowly and the diseases typically progress over months or
years. The other factor used in classification is whether the cells arose in the lymphoid lineage or in the myeloid lineage. Thus, there are four main categories of
leukemia: AML, CML, ALL, and CLL. In some cases, leukemia can be further
classified based on characteristic chromosome or genetic changes, some of which
are described below.
The clinical presentation of a hematologic malignancy may be subtle, or may
even be asymptomatic – presenting simply as a laboratory abnormality. For others,
symptoms may include fatigue and shortness of breath from anemia, bleeding and
bruising from low platelet counts, or recurrent infections. Some may note swollen
lymph nodes, abdominal fullness, bone pain, unexplained fevers, drenching sweats,
or weight loss. The diagnosis of leukemia is typically made when a bone marrow
aspirate and biopsy is performed to investigate such symptoms, or to evaluate
abnormal cells in the peripheral blood. Lymphomas or myeloma may be diagnosed
with a biopsy of an involved lymph node, bone marrow, or other organ.
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia (AML)
AML is the most common leukemia in adults, with more than 20 000 new cases
annually in the United States and an average age at diagnosis of 65. As leukemic
cells replace normal blood cells in the bone marrow, patients typically present with
fatigue, weakness, pallor, recurrent infections, bruising, or abnormal bleeding. The
WBC count can be abnormally high or low, and leukemic blast cells may be found
in the peripheral blood. The diagnosis may also be suspected when there is unexplained

Figure 4. Morphological examples of acute myeloid leukemia. (a) Blast cells without differentiation show few granules but may show Auer rods, as in this case; (b) cells in differentiation show
­ ultiple cytoplasmic granules; or (c) M3 blast cells contain prominent granules or multiple Auer
m
rods; (d) myelomonocytic blasts have some monocytoid differentiation; (e) monoblastic leukemia
in which >80% of blasts are monoblasts; (f) monocytic with <80% of blasts monoblasts.
Source: Hoffbrand and Moss, 2011. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley and Sons.

anemia or thrombocytopenia (low platelet count). Bone marrow aspiration and
biopsy will show that more than 20% of the cells in the bone marrow are myeloid
blasts, often with cellular inclusions, called Auer rods (Figure 4). The cells are
evaluated by flow cytometry to characterize specific protein markers, by cytogenetics

306

Leukemia, Lymphoma, and M yeloma

to identify abnormal chromosomes, and with molecular analyses. Increasingly, the
specific genetic signature allows for separation of AML into favorable, intermediate, and unfavorable risk categories, with 25%, 65%, and 10% of patients falling
into each category respectively.
Treatment of AML involves chemotherapy, with the goal of inducing a complete
remission (less than 5% blasts in the bone marrow), and hopefully long‐term cure.
This intensive induction chemotherapy, typically involving an anthracycline (such
as daunorubicin or idarubicin) and cytarabine, may not be tolerable by the frail or
elderly, and alternative treatments may be offered that instead focus on relief of
symptoms. Approximately two‐thirds of adults will attain complete remission after
intensive induction therapy. Although this may reduce the leukemic cells 1000‐
fold or more, most will suffer a relapse of AML within months if no further treatment is administered. For this reason, postremission consolidation chemotherapy
to further eradicate remaining leukemia cells may be offered, which can include
high dose cytarabine, auto transplant, or allo transplant. Because of the severity of
the underlying acute leukemia and the intensity of therapy, these disorders should
be treated at a center with extensive experience.
A specific subtype of AML, acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) deserves particular mention. Prior to the development of more specific and effective therapies,
APL was the most lethal form of AML. However, with contemporary approaches
to treatment, APL now has the highest cure rate among subtypes of AML. This
type of acute leukemia usually harbors the t(15;17) translocation, in which the
PML gene on chromosome 15 is fused to the retinoic acid receptor α gene, RARA,
on chromosome 17. The resultant fusion protein – PML‐RARA – causes arrested
differentiation of the malignant promyelocyte cells. In contrast to other forms of
AML for which intensive induction chemotherapy is the standard of care, the
mainstay of treatment for APL is all‐trans retinoic acid (ATRA), which binds to the
abnormal PML‐RARA protein and permits the arrested malignant cells to differentiate into normal, mature neutrophils. There is hope that an increased understanding of the underlying molecular defects in other forms of AML will lead to effective
novel targeted therapies, as has occurred with APL.

Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL)
ALL is the most common childhood malignancy in the United States, accounting
for nearly one‐third of all childhood cancers. The peak incidence is age three to
seven, but there is also a secondary peak after age 40. There are over 6000 new
cases of ALL annually, of which around 3000 will be diagnosed in children.
Accumulation of lymphoblasts in the bone marrow may cause failure of normal
blood cell development and lead to fatigue, pallor, fever, and bleeding. ALL may
also cause swelling of lymph nodes and the spleen, and infiltration of the central
nervous system (CNS) by leukemic blasts. Eighty‐five percent of ALL is of B‐cell

Ch ronic M yel og enous Leukemia (C ML)

307

lineage (B‐ALL), and the remainder is of T‐cell origin (T‐ALL). The most ­common
chromosomal abnormality in childhood B‐ALL, t(12;21), which forms the TEL‐
AML1 fusion protein, is associated with a good prognosis in ALL. Much like
AML, the specific genetic signature allows for stratification of childhood ALL into
low, average, high, and very high risk categories, with 15%, 36%, 25%, and 24%
of patients falling into each category respectively.
Treatment of ALL consists of induction chemotherapy with vincristine, asparaginase, and dexamethasone, with or without an anthracycline (such as daunorubicin
or doxorubicin). After achieving remission, consolidation chemotherapy or allo
transplant may be offered, depending on the child’s prognosis. Most childhood
ALL patients are treated in standardized clinical trial protocols, which include
preventive chemotherapy for the CNS. Maintenance therapy with lower intensity
treatment that further enhances the cure rate may extend for two or more years.
Remarkably, these approaches have converted this formerly lethal disease to one
with a cure rate of 85–90%. Although contemporary treatment cures most children
with ALL, therapy can cause long‐term effects on growth, maturation, and cognition. Thus, there is interest in identifying treatment that is less toxic, but still curative, for children with good prognosis disease. Those with poor prognostic features
should receive more intensive therapy, with the goal of increasing the cure rate.
In contrast to the successes of childhood ALL, fewer than 40% of adults with
ALL are free of leukemia after five years, and less than 5% of adults over the age
of 70 survive for five years. Therefore, new treatments for adult ALL are in development to prevent relapse after an initial response to induction therapy.
Blinatumomab is a type of immunotherapy that uses the patient’s own immune
system to kill ALL cells by inducing the patient’s own normal T lymphocytes to
attack residual leukemia. Other approaches include investigational use of CAR‐T
cells (chimeric antigen receptor T‐cells) that can destroy residual leukemic cells.
These and other approaches that utilize the immune system to destroy leukemic
cells offer new treatment strategies in situations where conventional chemotherapy
has not yet achieved the successes seen in childhood ALL.

Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML)
Chronic leukemias, which are classified as either myeloid or lymphoid, are distinguished by the more mature appearance of the leukemic cells, and their slower rate
of progression. CML arises from an abnormal hematopoietic pluripotent stem cell
that undergoes rearrangement of chromosomes 9 and 22 (the so‐called Philadelphia
chromosome; Ph’) to create a fusion of two genes, known as BCR‐ABL (Figure 5).
The Ph’ chromosome and BCR‐ABL were the first specific chromosomal and
genetic abnormalities to be associated with a particular human cancer. BCR‐ABL
is an uncontrolled, overactive tyrosine kinase protein that drives CML by adding
phosphate groups to other cellular proteins. Development of imatinib (Gleevec®)

Figure 5. The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph’). (a) There is translocation of part of the long arm
of chromosome 22 to the long arm of chromosome 9 and reciprocal translocation of part of the
long arm of chromosome 9 to chromosome 22 (the Philadelphia chromosome). This reciprocal
translocation brings most of the ABL gene into the BCR region on chromosome 22 (and part of
the BCR gene into juxtaposition with the remaining portion of ABL on chromosome 9). (b) The
breakpoint in ABL is between exons 1 and 2. The breakpoint in BCR is at one of the two points in
the major breakpoint cluster region (M‐BCR) in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) or in some cases
of Ph + acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). (c) This results in a 210 k‐Da fusion protein product
derived from the BCR‐ABL fusion gene. In other cases of Ph + ALL, the breakpoint in BCR is at a
minor breakpoint cluster region (m‐BCR) resulting in a smaller BCR‐ABL fusion gene and a 190‐
kDa protein. Source: Hoffbrand and Moss, 2011. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley and Sons.
(See insert for color representation.)

and other targeted agents against BCR‐ABL represented a paradigm shift in the
treatment of cancer, and proved that attacking specific molecular abnormalities
could achieve effective and durable remissions. Numerous targeted agents
have since been developed that attack the underlying molecular defects in other
types of cancer.
There are over 6600 cases of CML diagnosed annually, accounting for about
15% of all leukemias. Most patients are diagnosed between the ages of 40 and 60,
but it can also occur in children. The only known risk factor is ionizing radiation,
such as occurred in atomic bomb survivors in Japan. Patients may present with
fatigue, weight loss, night sweats, or an enlarged spleen, but many are diagnosed
incidentally when a routine blood count shows an abnormally high WBC. Typically,
the peripheral blood shows an increased number of both immature and mature
myeloid cells, including neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, and monocytes.
Chromosomal testing of peripheral blood and bone marrow will detect the
Ph’ chromosome, and molecular studies confirm the presence of the BCR‐ABL
fusion gene. Most patients (85–90%) are identified in chronic phase of CML.
Before the development of highly effective tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), the
chronic phase CML would typically progress within four to five years to the more

Ch ronic Lympho cyti c Leukemia (CLL)

309

aggressive accelerated phase or blast phase, which resembles an aggressive acute
leukemia. These latter stages of CML are characterized by an increased percentage of myeloblasts in the peripheral blood or bone marrow, and worsening symptoms
of fever, fatigue, and weight loss.
Initial treatment of chronic phase CML consists of daily treatment with oral
TKIs that specifically block BCR‐ABL activity. Although these drugs are highly
effective, some patients develop resistance or do not tolerate the TKI. However,
newer TKIs provide a good response in many of these patients with chronic phase
CML, including some who have developed mutations of BCR‐ABL that render it
resistant to imatinib. In patients with a suboptimal response to multiple TKIs, allo
transplant is the only proven curative treatment option.
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
CLL is the most common leukemia of the lymphoid lineage, with over 14 000
cases diagnosed annually in the United States. It has a peak incidence between 60
and 80 years of age. CLL arises from a clone of malignant B cells that resemble
mature lymphocytes, but they also aberrantly express T‐cell proteins (e.g., CD5),
in addition to the usual complement of B cell proteins. These abnormal lymphocytes accumulate in the blood, bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes. Most
patients are diagnosed when a routine complete blood count shows an elevated
WBC and lymphocyte count. A peripheral blood smear shows a large number of
lymphocytes, including so‐called “smudge cells” (Figure 6). The most frequent
clinical sign is enlargement of lymph nodes in the neck, armpits, groin, or other

Figure 6. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: peripheral blood smear showing lymphocytes with thin
rims of cytoplasm, coarse condensed nuclear chromatin and rare nucleoli. Typical smudge cells are


sites, or abdominal fullness from an enlarged spleen. The diagnosis of CLL is
confirmed when flow cytometry studies show that the abnormal cells express both
B cell antigens and the CD5 antigen. Various classification systems are used to
stage CLL and establish the prognosis, based on whether the patient has lymphadenopathy, an enlarged spleen, anemia, or thrombocytopenia.
Because most cases of CLL progress slowly, patients may be observed for
months or years (“watchful waiting,”) before treatment is needed. In other words,
the mere presence of CLL is not reason enough to initiate treatment, because early
treatment will not affect the long‐term outcome. Generally, treatment is begun
when the patient has, or is likely to soon have, significant symptoms, such as an
enlarging spleen, or troublesome or rapidly growing lymph nodes that interfere
with the activities of daily living. Other indications for treatment include development of constitutional, or “B symptoms,” i.e., fatigue, fevers, drenching night
sweats, or weight loss; a rapid increase in the peripheral blood lymphocyte count;
or progressive anemia or thrombocytopenia. Some may develop abnormal antibodies that attack their own red blood cells or platelets, causing anemia or thrombocytopenia, and these conditions may be indications for treatment. Because CLL may


PET/CT is used to determine the extent of lymphoma involvement throughout the
body. Stage I indicates lymphoma involvement in only one lymph node region, and
stage II indicates lymphoma involving two or more lymph node areas confined to
one side of the diaphragm. Patients are also classified as A or B according to
whether or not B symptoms (fever, night sweats, weight loss) are present. Stage I
and stage II disease without B symptoms or bulky disease (a lymph node
area > 10 cm in diameter), is considered early stage HL. Stage III has involvement
in lymph node areas above and below the diaphragm, and stage IV indicates widespread disease outside the lymph node areas including the liver, lung, or bone marrow. Advanced stage HL includes stage III and IV disease, as well as patients with
stage I and II disease with bulky disease and/or B symptoms.
Over 80% of patients with HL are cured with standard treatment and, unlike
advanced stage disease in many other forms of cancer, even stage IV lymphomas
can be cured. Early stage HL is typically treated with combination chemotherapy
(usually adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine; ABVD), sometimes
followed by radiation therapy to involved lymph nodes. Advanced stage HL is
treated with more cycles of ABVD chemotherapy, with or without radiation therapy. Newer agents that directly target the RS cells are being tested in resistant
disease, although high dose chemotherapy followed by auto transplant is also
effective.

Non‐Hodgkin Lymphoma
NHL is the most common hematologic malignancy, with over 71 000 new cases
diagnosed each year, making up about 5% of all cancers. It is the sixth most common cause of cancer in both men and women in the United States. The incidence
of NHL increases with age, and median age at diagnosis is 64. NHL is not a single
disease; rather, the World Health Organization classifies more than 60 types of
NHL! They are broadly divided into four main categories: indolent (slow‐growing)
or aggressive lymphomas of either B‐cell or T‐cell origin. B‐cell lymphomas make
up 85% of all NHL, while the remainder of NHL are T‐cell lymphomas. Aggressive
lymphomas commonly present with a rapidly growing mass and B symptoms, and
they can be rapidly fatal within weeks, if untreated. Examples of aggressive lymphomas include diffuse large B‐cell lymphoma (DLBCL), Burkitt lymphoma, and
adult T‐cell lymphoma. Indolent lymphomas typically present with slow growing
lymphadenopathy that may wax and wane for years, even without treatment.
Examples of indolent lymphomas include follicular lymphoma and marginal zone
lymphoma. Patients with B‐cell lymphomas benefit from rituximab (Rituxan®),
which is directed against the B‐cell protein, CD20; rituximab was the first
therapeutic monoclonal antibody approved for cancer treatment. Nearly all B‐cell
lymphomas express CD20, therefore rituximab and related monoclonal antibodies
have become a mainstay of treatment in B‐cell lymphomas.
